
--- PAGE 1 ---
ICD-10
International
Statistical
Classification
of Diseases and
Related Health
Problems
Tenth Revision
Volume �
Second Edition
World Health Organization
Geneva

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data  
ICD-10 : international statistical classification of diseases and related health problems : tenth revision. — 2nd ed.  
3 v.  
Contents: v. 1. Tabular list — v. 2. Instruction manual — v. 3. Alphabetical index.  
I.Disease - classification 2.Classification. 3.Manuals I.World Health Organization  
II.Title: International statistical classification of diseases : 10th revision  
III.Title: ICD-10. Second edition. 
 ISBN 92 4 154649 2 (vol. 1) (NLM classification: WB 15) 
 92 4 154653 0 (vol. 2) 
 92 4 154654 9 (vol. 3) 
 
© World Health Organization 2004  
All rights reserved. Publications  of the World Health Organizati on can be obtained from Marketing and 
Dissemination, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel: +41 22 791 2476; 
fax: +41 22 791 4857; ema il: bookorders@who.int
). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO 
publications – whether for sale or for noncommercia l distribution – should be addressed to Marketing and 
Dissemination, at the above address (fax: +41 22 791 4806; email: permissions@who.int).  
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression 
of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, 
territory, city or area or of its author ities, or concerning the de limitation of its frontiers  or boundaries. Dotted lines 
on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.  
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not impl y that they are 
endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in  preference to others of a similar nature that are 
not mentioned. Errors and omissions ex cepted, the names of pr oprietary products are distinguished by initial 
capital letters.  
The World Health Organization does not warrant that the information contained in this publication is complete 
and correct and shall not be liable for any damages incurred as a result of its use.  
The 43rd World Health Assembly in 1990 approved the T enth Revision of the International Classification of 
Diseases (WHA 43.24) and endorsed the recom mendation of the The Internati onal Conference for the Tenth 
Revision of the ICD held in Geneva from 26 September to 2 October 1989 concerning the est ablishment of an 
updating process within the 10-year revision cycle.  
This recommendation was put into motion at the annual m eeting of WHO Collaborating Centres for the Family 
of International Classifications in Tokyo, Japan in  1996 and later a formal mechanism to guide the updating 
process was established. According to this updating me chanism minor updates are made each year while major 
updates are made, if required, every three years.  
For more information regarding the updating process and a cumulative list of the updates please see 
http://www.who.int/classifications/. Future updates will also be posted on this site.  
This Second Edition of ICD-10 includes the corrigenda to Volume 1 which appeared as an addendum to 
Volume 3 of the first edition, as well as the updates that came into effect between 1998 and 2003.  
Typeset by DIMDI in Germany and adapted for electronic use by WHO 
 
Print of this version is not permitted  

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
iii 
Contents 
1. Introduction 1 
2. Description of the International Statistica l Classification of Diseases and Related 
Health Problems 3 
2.1 Purpose and applicability 3 
2.2 The concept of a “family” of disease and health-related classifications 4 
2.2.1 Diagnosis-related classifications 6 
2.2.2 Non-diagnostic classifications 8 
2.2.3 Information support to primary health care 11 
2.2.4 International Nomenclature of Diseases 12 
2.2.5 The role of WHO 13 
2.3 General principles of disease classification 13 
2.4 The basic structure and principles of classification of the 
ICD 14 
2.4.1 Volumes 15 
2.4.2 Chapters 16 
2.4.3 Blocks of categories 17 
2.4.4 Three-character categories 17 
2.4.5 Four-character subcategories 17 
2.4.6 Supplementary subdivisions for use at the fifth or 
subsequent character level 18 
2.4.7 The unused “U” codes 18 
3. How to use the ICD 19 
3.1 How to use Volume 1 19 
3.1.1 Introduction 19 
3.1.2 Use of the tabular list of inclusions and four- 
character subcategories 20 
3.1.3 Two codes for certain conditions 21 
3.1.4 Conventions used in the tabular list 24 
3.1.5 Categories with common characteristics 27 
3.2 How to use Volume 3 28 
3.2.1 Arrangement of the Alphabetical Index 28 
3.2.2 Structure 29 
3.2.3 Code numbers 29 
3.2.4 Conventions 29 
3.3 Basic coding guidelines 30 
4. Rules and guidelines for mortality and morbidity coding 31 
4.1 Mortality: guidelines for certification and rules for coding 31 
4.1.1 Causes of death 31 
4.1.2 Underlying cause of death 31 

--- PAGE 4 ---
lNTERNATlONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
iv 
4.1.3 International form of medical certificate of cause 
of death 32 
4.1.4 Procedures for selection of the underlying cause of 
death for mortality tabulation 34 
4.1.5 Rules for selection of the originating antecedent cause 34 
4.1.6 Some considerations on selection rules 36 
4.1.7 Examples of the General Principle and selection rules 37 
4.1.8 Modification of the selected cause 43 
4.1.9 The modification rules 43 
4.1.10 Examples of the modification rules 45 
4.1.11 Notes for use in underlying cause mortality coding 51 
4.1.12 Summary of linkages by code number 64 
4.2 Notes for interpretation of entries of causes of death 69 
4.2.1 Assumption of intervening cause 69 
4.2.2 Interpretation of “highly improbable” 69 
4.2.3 Effect of duration on classification 72 
4.2.4 Sequelae 72 
4.2.5 Consistency between sex of patient and diagnosis 74 
4.2.6 Operations 74 
4.2.7 Malignant neoplasms 74 
4.2.8 Rheumatic fever with heart involvement 89 
4.2.9 Congenital malforma tions, deformations and 
chromosomal abnormalities 89 
4.2.10 Nature of injury 90 
4.2.11 Poisoning by drugs, medicaments and biological 
substances 91 
4.2.12 External causes 91 
4.2.13 Expressions indicating doubtful diagnosis 92 
4.2.14 Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) 92 
4.3 Perinatal mortality: guidelines for certification and rules 
for coding 92 
4.3.1 Certification of perinatal deaths 92 
4.3.2 Statement of causes of death 94 
4.3.3 Tabulation of perinatal mortality by cause 97 
4.3.4 Coding of causes of death 97 
4.3.5 Coding rules 98 
4.4 Morbidity 101 
4.4.1 Guidelines for recording diagnostic information for 
single-condition analysis of morbidity data 102 
4.4.2 Guidelines for coding “main condition” and “other 
conditions” 104 
4.4.3 Rules for reselection when the main condition is 
incorrectly recorded 111 
4.4.4 Chapter-specific notes 117 
5. Statistical presentation 129 
5.1 Introduction 129 
5.2 Source of data 129 
5.3 Level of detail of cause in tabulations 129 
5.4 The recommended special tabulation lists for mortality 130 

--- PAGE 5 ---
CONTENTS 
v 
5.4.1 The condensed lists 130 
5.4.2 The selected lists 130 
5.4.3 Use of prefixes to identify the mortality lists 131 
5.4.4 Locally designed lists 131 
5.5 The special tabulation list for morbidity 131 
5.5.1 Description 131 
5.5.2 Modification of the special tabulation list for morbidity according to national 
requirements 132 
5.6 Recommendations in relation to statisti cal tables for international comparison 132 
5.6.1 Statistical tables 132 
5.6.2 Tabulation of causes of death 133 
5.7 Standards and reporting requirements related to fetal, perinatal, neonatal and infant 
mortality 134 
5.7.1 Definitions 134 
5.7.2 Reporting criteria 136 
5.7.3 Statistics for international comparison 136 
5.7.4 Presentation of causes of perinatal mortality 138 
5.8 Standards and reporting requirements related to 
maternal mortality 139 
5.8.1 Definitions 139 
5.8.2 International reporting 140 
5.8.3 Published maternal mortality rates 140 
5.8.4 Denominators for maternal mortality 141 
5.9 Proportion of deaths classified to ill-defined causes 141 
5.10 Morbidity 141 
5.11 Precautions needed when tabulation lists include 
subtotals 142 
5.12 Problems of a small population 142 
5.13 “Empty cells” and cells with low frequencies 143 
6. History of the development of the ICD 145 
6.1 Early history 145 
6.2 Adoption of the International List of Causes of Death 147 
6.3 The Fifth Decennial Revision Conference 149 
6.4 Previous classifications of diseases for morbidity 
statistics 150 
6.5 United States Committee on Joint Causes of Death 152 
6.6 Sixth Revision of the International Lists 153 
6.7 The Seventh and Eighth Revisions 155 
6.8 The Ninth Revision 155 

--- PAGE 6 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
vi 
6.9 Preparations for the Tenth Revision 156 
7. Appendices 159 
7.1 List of conditions unlikely to cause death 159 
References 167 
Index  169 

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
1 
1. Introduction 
This volume of the Tenth Revision of the Inte rnational Statistical Classification of Diseases and 
Related Health Problems (ICD-10) contains guidelines for recording and coding, together with much 
new material on practical aspects of the classificati on’s use, as well as an outline of the historical 
background to the classification. This material is  presented as a separate volume for ease of handling 
when reference needs to be made at the same time to the classification (Volume 1) and the instructions 
for its use. Detailed instructions on the use of th e Alphabetical Index are contained in the introduction 
to Volume 3. 
This manual provides a basic description of the ICD, t ogether with practical instructions for mortality 
and morbidity coders, and guidelines for the presentati on and interpretation of da ta. It is not intended 
to provide detailed training in the use of the ICD. The material included here needs to be augmented 
by formal courses of instruction allowing extensive practice on sample records and discussion of 
problems. 
If problems arising from the use of the ICD cannot be resolved either locally or with the help of 
national statistical offices, advice is available fro m the WHO Collaborating Centres for the Family of 
International Classifications (see Volume 1). 

--- PAGE 8 ---


--- PAGE 9 ---
 
3 
2. Description of the International Statistical 
Classification of Diseases and Related Health 
Problems 
2.1 Purpose and applicability 
A classification of diseases can be defined as a syst em of categories to which morbid entities are 
assigned according to established criteria. The purpo se of the ICD is to permit the systematic 
recording analysis, interpretation and comparison of mortality and morbidity data collected in different 
countries or areas and at different times. The ICD is used to translate diagnoses of diseases and other 
health problems from words into an alphanumeric code, which permits easy storage, retrieval and 
analysis of the data. 
In practice, the ICD has become the internationa l standard diagnostic classification for all general 
epidemiological and many health management pur poses. These include the analysis of the general 
health situation of population groups and the mon itoring of the incidence and prevalence of diseases 
and other health problems in relation to other vari ables, such as the charact eristics and circumstances 
of the individuals affected. The ICD is neither inte nded nor suitable for indexing of distinct clinical 
entities. There are also some constraints on the use of the ICD for studies of financial aspects, such as 
billing or resource allocation. 
The ICD can be used to classify diseases and other h ealth problems recorded on many types of health 
and vital records. Its original use was to classify causes of mortality as recorded at the registration of 
death. Later, its scope was extended to include di agnoses in morbidity. It is important to note that, 
although the ICD is primarily designed for the classification of diseases and injuries with a formal 
diagnosis, not every problem or reason for coming into  contact with health services can be categorized 
in this way. Consequently, the ICD provides for a wide variety of signs, symptoms, abnormal findings, 
complaints, and social circumstances that may sta nd in place of a diagnosis on health-related records 
(see Volume 1, Chapters  XVIII and XXI). It can th erefore be used to classify data recorded under 
headings such as “diagnosis”, “reason for ad mission”, “conditions treated” and “reason for 
consultation”, which appear on a wide variety of h ealth records from which statistics and other health-
situation information are derived. 
2.2 The concept of a “family” of di sease and health-related classifications 
Although the ICD is suitable for many different appli cations, it does not always allow the inclusion of 
sufficient detail for some specialties, and some times information on different attributes of the 
classified conditions may be needed. It has also  been suggested that the ICD should include 
classifications of additional information related to health status or health care. 
It was felt that the main ICD (the three- and four-character classification), covered by the three 
volumes of ICD-10, could not incorporate all this  additional information and remain accessible and 
relevant to its traditional users, so the idea arose of a “family” of disease and health-related 
classifications, including volumes published separately from the main ICD, to be used as required. 
The “core” classification of ICD-10 is the three-character code, which is the mandatory level of coding 
for international reporting to the WHO mortality da tabase and for general international comparisons. 
The four-character subcategories, while not mandato ry for reporting at the international level, are 
recommended for many purposes and form an integral part of the ICD, as do the special tabulation 
lists. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
4 
There are two main types of classification. Those in  the first group cover data related to diagnoses and 
health status, and are derived directly from the ICD by either condensation or expansion of the tabular 
list. The condensed lists can be used for many ki nds of data presentation, for summary statistical 
tables, and potentially for information support in th e development of primary health care (see 2.2.3), 
while the expanded lists are used to obtain in creased clinical detail as in the specialty-based 
adaptations (see 2.2.1). This group also includes classi fications complementary to the tabular list, that 
allow the allocation of diagnoses using a different axis of classification, such as the morphology of 
tumours. 
The second group of classifications covers aspects rela ted to health problems generally outside the 
formal diagnoses of current conditions, as well as othe r classifications related to health care. This 
group includes classifications of disablement, of medical and surgical procedures, and of reasons for 
contact with health care providers. 
The ICD family also covers a conceptual framewo rk of definitions, standards, and methods that, 
although they are not classifications in themselves, have been closely linked to the ICD for a long 
time. One of these concepts is the development of methods to support the local collection and use of 
information for primary health care. 
Another publication related to, but not derived from, the ICD is the International Nomenclature of 
Diseases (IND). The difference between a classification and a nomenclature is discussed at 2.3. 
The figure below shows the content and interrelations hips of the various members of the family of 
classifications. 
Family of disease and health-related classifications 


--- PAGE 11 ---
DESCRIPTION OF THE ICD 
5 
2.2.1 Diagnosis-related classifications 
Special tabulation lists 
The special tabulation lists are derived directly from the core classification, for use in data presentation 
and to facilitate analysis of health status and tr ends at the internationa l, national and subnational 
levels. The special tabulation lists recommended fo r international comparisons and publications are 
included in Volume 1. There are five such lists, f our for mortality and one for morbidity (for further 
details, see sections 5.4. and 5.5.). 
Specialty-based adaptations 
Specialty-based adaptations usually bring together in a single, compact volume the sections or 
categories of the ICD that are relevant to a particul ar specialty. The four-character subcategories of the 
ICD are retained, but more detail is often given by means of fifth-character or sometimes sixth-
character subdivisions, and there is an alphabetical index of relevant terms. Other adaptations may 
give glossary definitions of categories and subcategories within the specialty. 
The adaptations have often been developed by inte rnational groups of specia lists, but national groups 
have sometimes published adaptations that have late r been used in other countries. The following list 
includes some of the major specialty adaptations to date. 
Oncology 
The third edition of the International Classification of Diseases for Oncology (ICD-O), published by 
WHO in 2000, is intended for use in cancer regist ries, and in pathology and other departments 
specializing in cancer (1). ICD-O is a dual-axis classification with coding systems for both topography 
and morphology. The topography code uses, for most neoplasms, the same three-character and four-
character categories used in ICD-10 for malignant neoplasms (categories C00-C80). ICD-O thus 
allows greater specificity of site for non-malignant neoplasms than is possible in ICD-10. 
The morphology code for neoplasms is identical to that in the Systematized nomenclature of medicine  
(SNOMED) (2), which was derived from the 1968 edition of the Manual of tumor nomenclature and 
coding (MOTNAC) (3) and the Systematized nomenclature of pathology (SNOP) (4). The morphology 
code has five digits; the first four digits identify th e histological type and the fifth the behaviour of the 
neoplasm (malignant, in situ, benign, etc.). The ICD-O morphology code also appear in Volume 1 of 
ICD-10 and are added to the relevant entries in Volu me 3, the Alphabetical Index. Tables are available 
for the conversion of the ICD-O third edition codes to ICD-10. 
Dermatology 
In 1978, the British Association of Dermatologists published the International Coding Index for 
Dermatology compatible with the Ninth Revision of the ICD. The Association has also published an 
adaptation of ICD-10 to dermatology, under the auspices of the International League of 
Dermatological Societies. 
Dentistry and stomatology 
The third edition of the Application of the Inte rnational Classification of Diseases to Dentistry and 
Stomatology (ICD-DA), based on ICD-10, was published by WHO in 1995. It brings together ICD 
categories for diseases or conditions that occur in, have  manifestations in, or have associations with 
the oral cavity and adjacent structures. It provides gr eater detail than ICD-10 by means of a fifth digit, 
but the numbering system is organized so that th e relationship between an ICD-DA code and the ICD 
code from which it is derived is immediately obvious, and so that data from ICD-DA categories can be 
readily incorporated into ICD categories. 
Neurology 
In 1997 WHO published an adaptation of ICD-10 to neurology (ICD-NA), which retains the  
classification and coding systems of ICD-10 but is fu rther subdivided at the fifth-character level and 
beyond to allow neurological diseases to be classified with greater precision. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
6 
Rheumatology and orthopaedics 
The International League of Associations of Rheumatology is working on a revision of the 
Application of the International Classification of Diseases to Rheumatology and Orthopaedics (ICD-
R&O), including the International Classification of  Musculoskeletal Disorders (ICMSD), to be 
compatible with ICD-10. The ICD-R&O provides de tailed specification of conditions through the use 
of additional digits, which allow for extra deta il while retaining compatibility with ICD-10. The 
ICMSD is designed to clarify and standardize the use of terms and is supported by a glossary of 
generic descriptors for groups of conditions, such as the inflammatory polyarthropathies. 
Paediatrics 
Under the auspices of the International Pediatric A ssociation, the British Paediatric Association (BPA) 
has published an application of ICD-10 to paediatr ics, which uses a fifth digit to provide greater 
specificity. This follows similar applications prepared by BPA for ICD-8 and ICD-9. 
Mental disorders 
The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural  Disorders:  clinical descriptions and diagnostic 
guidelines. This volume, published in 1992, provides for each category in Chapter V of ICD-10 
(Mental and behavioural disorders) a general d escription and guidelines concerning the diagnosis, as 
well as comments about differential diagnosis a nd a listing of synonyms and exclusion terms ( 5). 
Where more detail is required, the guidelines give further subdivisions at the fifth and sixth digit 
levels. A second publication relating to Chapter V, Diagnostic criteria for research , was published in 
1993. 
A  version of the classification for use in primary health care, and another version that uses a 
rearrangement of categories of childhood mental disorders in a multiaxial system, to allow 
simultaneous assessment of the clinical state, relevant environmental factors, and the degree of 
disability linked to the disease have also been developed. 
2.2.2 Non-diagnostic classifications  
Procedures in medicine 
The International Classification of Procedures in Medicine  (ICPM) was published in two volumes by 
WHO in 1978 (6). It includes procedures for medical diagnosis, prevention, therapy, radiology, drugs, 
and surgical and laboratory procedures. The classifi cation has been adopted by some countries, while 
others have used it as a basis for developing their own national classifications of surgical operations. 
The Heads of WHO Collaborating Centres for Cl assification of Diseases recognized that the process 
of consultation that had to be fo llowed before finalization and publica tion was inappropriate in such a 
wide and rapidly advancing field. They therefore recommended that there should be no revision of the 
ICPM in conjunction with the Tenth Revision of the ICD. 
In 1987, the Expert Committee on the Internationa l Classification of Diseases asked WHO to consider 
updating at least the outline for surgical procedures (C hapter 5) of the ICPM for the Tenth Revision. 
In response to this request and the needs expressed by a number of countries, the Secretariat prepared 
a tabulation list for procedures. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
DESCRIPTION OF THE ICD 
7 
At their meeting in 1989, the Heads of the Collabora ting Centres agreed that the list could serve as a 
guide for the national publication of statistics on surgical procedures and could also facilitate 
intercountry comparisons. The list could also be u sed as a basis for the development of comparable 
national classifications of surgical procedures. 
Work on the list will continue, but any publication w ill follow the issue of ICD-10. In the meantime, 
other approaches to this subject are being explored . Some of these have common characteristics, such 
as a fixed field for specific items (organ, techni que, approach, etc.), the possibility of being 
automatically updated, and the flexibility of being used for more than one purpose. 
The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health 
The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) was published by WHO 
in all six WHO official languages in 2001, after its official endorsement by the Fifty-fourth World 
Health Assembly on 22 May 2001. It has subsequently been translated into over 25 languages. 
ICF classifies health and health-related states in tw o parts. Part 1 classifies functioning and disability. 
Part 2 comprises environmental and personal contextu al factors. Functioning and disability in Part 1 
are described from the perspectives of the body, th e individual, and society, formulated in two 
components: (1) body functions and structures, and (2) activities and participation. Since an 
individual’s functioning and disability occur in a contex t, the ICF also includes a list of environmental 
factors. 
The ICF has superseded the International Classi fication of Impairments, Disabilities and Handicaps 
(ICIDH). As a consequence the old ICIDH terms and definitions have been replaced by the following 
new ICF terms and definitions: 
Functioning is a generic term for body functions, body structures, activities and participation. It 
denotes the positive aspects of the interaction betw een an individual (with a health condition) 
and that individual’s contextual factors (environmental and personal factors). 
Disability is an umbrella term for impairments, activity limitations and participation restrictions. 
It denotes the negative aspects of the interaction between an individual (with a health condition) 
and that individual’s contextual factors (environmental and personal factors). 
Body functions  are the physiological functions of body systems (including psychological 
functions). 
Body structures are anatomical parts of the body such as organs, limbs and their components. 
Impairments are problems in body function or structure such as a significant deviation or loss. 
Activity is the execution of a task or action by an individual. 
Activity limitations are difficulties an individual may have in executing activities. 
Participation is involvement in a life situation. 
Participation restrictions  are problems an individual may experience in involvement in life 
situations. 
Environmental factors make up the physical, social and attitudinal environment in which people 
live and conduct their lives. 
ICF uses an alphanumeric system in which the letters b, s, d and e are used to denote Body Functions, 
Body Structures, Activities and Participation, and Environmental Factors. These letters are followed 
by a numeric code that starts with the chapter number (one digit), followed by the second level (two 
digits), and the third and fourth levels (one digit each). ICF categories are “nested” so that broader 
categories are defined to include more detailed sub categories of the parent category. Any individual 
may have a range of codes at each level. These may be independent or interrelated. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
8 
The ICF codes are only complete with the presence of a qualifier, which denotes a magnitude of the 
level of health (e.g. severity of the problem). Qua lifiers are coded as one, two or more numbers after a 
point (or separator). Use of any code should be  accompanied by at least one qualifier. Without 
qualifiers, codes have no inherent meaning. The firs t qualifier for Body Functions and Structures, the 
performance and capacity qualifiers for Activities a nd Participation, and the first qualifier for 
Environmental Factors all describe the extent of problems in the respective component. 
The ICF puts the notions of ‘health’ and ‘disability’ in a new light. It acknowledges that every human 
being can experience a decrement in health and thereby experience some disability. This is not 
something that happens to only a minority of pe ople. ICF thus ‘mainstreams’ the experience of 
disability and recognizes it as a universal human e xperience. By shifting the focus from cause to 
impact it places all health conditions on an equal footing allowing them to be compared using a 
common metric – the ruler of health and disability . Furthermore ICF takes into account the social 
aspects of disability and does not see disability only as a ‘medical’ or ‘biological’ dysfunction. By 
including Contextual Factors, in which environmenta l factors are listed, ICF allows the recording of 
the impact of the environment on the person’s functioning. 
The ICF is WHO’s framework for measuring health and disability at both individual and population 
levels. While the International Classification of Diseases classifies diseases and causes of death, the 
ICF classifies health domains. The ICD and ICF cons titute the two major building blocks of WHO’s 
Family of International Classifications. Together, they provide exceptionally broad yet accurate tools 
to capture the full picture of health. 
2.2.3 Information support to primary health care 
One of the challenges of the Global Strategy for Health for All by the Year 2000 is to provide 
information support to primary health care (PHC). In  countries without complete information or with 
only poor-quality data, a variety of approaches need to be adopted to supplement or replace the 
conventional use of the ICD. 
Since the late 1970’s, various countries have experime nted with the collection of information by lay 
personnel. Lay reporting has subsequently been  extended to a broader concept called “non-
conventional methods”. These methods, covering a vari ety of approaches, have evolved in different 
countries as a means of obtaining information on health status where conventional methods (censuses, 
surveys, vital or institutional morbidity and mortality statistics) have been found to be inadequate. 
One of these approaches, “community -based information”, involves community participation in the 
definition, collection and use of health-related da ta. The degree of community participation ranges 
from involvement only in data collection to the d esign, analysis and utilization of information. 
Experience in several countries has shown that this approach is more than a theoretical framework. 
The International Conference for the Tenth Revi sion of the International Classification of Diseases 
(see Volume 1) noted in its report: 
The Conference was informed about the experience of  countries in developing and applying community-
based health information that covered health problem s and needs, related risk factors and resources. It 
supported the concept of developing non-conventional methods at the community level as a method of 
filling information gaps in indivi dual countries and stre ngthening their informa tion systems. It was 
stressed that, for both developed and developing countries, such methods or systems should be developed 
locally and that, because of factors such as morbidity patterns as well as language and cultural variations, 
transfer to other areas or countries should not be attempted. 
Given the encouraging results of this approach in  many countries, the Conference agreed that WHO 
should continue to give guidance on the developm ent of local schemes and to support the progress of 
the methodology. 
2.2.4 International Nomenclature of Diseases 
In 1970, the Council for International Organiza tions of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) began the 
preparation of an International Nomenclature of Diseases (IND), with the assistance of its member 
organizations, and five volumes of provisional nom enclature were issued during 1972-1974. It was 
soon realized, however, that the compilation of such a nomenclature, were it to be truly international, 

--- PAGE 15 ---
DESCRIPTION OF THE ICD 
9 
would need much wider consultation than was possible through the members of CIOMS alone. In 
1975, the IND became a joint project of CIOMS and WHO, guided by a Technical Steering 
Committee of representatives from both organizations. 
The principal objective of the IND is to provide , for each morbid entity, a single recommended name. 
The main criteria for selection of this name are th at it should be specific (applicable to one and only 
one disease), unambiguous, as self-descriptive as possible, as simple as possible, and (whenever 
feasible) based on cause. However, many widely used  names that do not fully meet the above criteria 
are being retained as synonyms, provided they are not  inappropriate, misleading, or contrary to the 
recommendations of international specialist organi zations. Eponymous terms are avoided since they 
are not self-descriptive; however, many of these na mes are in such widespread use (e.g. Hodgkin 
disease, Parkinson disease and Addison disease) that they must be retained. 
Each disease or syndrome for which a name is recommended is defined as unambiguously and as 
briefly as possible. A list of synonyms appears afte r each definition. These comprehensive lists are  
supplemented, if necessary, by explanations about why certain synonyms have been rejected or why 
an alleged synonym is not a true synonym. 
The IND is intended to be complementary to the ICD. The differences between a nomenclature and a 
classification are discussed at 2.3. As far as possibl e, IND terminology has been given preference in 
the ICD. 
The volumes of the IND published up to 1992 ( 8) are: Infectious diseases (bacterial diseases (1985), 
mycoses (1982), viral diseases (1983), parasitic diseases (1987)); Diseases of the lower respiratory 
tract (1979); Diseases of the digestive system  (1990); Cardiac and vascular diseases  (1989); 
Metabolic, nutritional and endocrine disorders (1991); Diseases of the kidney, the lower urinary tract, 
and the male genital system (1992); and Diseases of the female genital system (1992). 
2.2.5 The role of WHO 
Most of the classifications described above are the product of very close collaboration between 
nongovernmental organizations, other agencies, and divisions and units of WHO, with the unit 
responsible for the ICD and the ICF assuming a coordinating role and providing guidance and advice. 
WHO promotes the development of adaptations that extend both the usefulness of the ICD and the ICF 
and the comparability of health statistics. The role  of WHO in the development of new classifications, 
adaptations, and glossaries is to provide cooperativ e leadership and to act as a clearing-house, giving 
technical advice, guidance and support when needed. An yone interested in preparing an adaptation of 
ICD-10 or the ICF should consult with WHO as soon as a clear statement of the objectives of the 
adaptation has been developed. Unnecessary duplica tion will thus be avoi ded by a coordinated 
approach to the development of the various components of the family. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
10 
2.3 General principles of disease classification 
As William Farr stated in 1856 (9): 
Classification is a method of generalization. Severa l classifications may, therefore, be used with 
advantage; and the physician, the pathologist, or the jurist, each from his own point of view, may 
legitimately classify the diseases and the causes of death in the way that he thinks best adapted to 
facilitate his inquiries, and to yield general results. 
A statistical classification of diseases must be confined to a limited number of mutually exclusive 
categories able to encompass the whole range of morb id conditions. The categories have to be chosen 
to facilitate the statistical study of disease phenomena. A specific disease entity that is of particular 
public health importance or that occurs frequently should have its own category. Otherwise, categories 
will be assigned to groups of separate but related conditions. Every disease or morbid condition must 
have a well defined place in the list of categories.  Consequently, throughout the classification, there 
will be residual categories for other and miscellaneous conditions that cannot be allocated to the more 
specific categories. As few conditions as possible should be classified to residual categories. 
It is the element of grouping that distinguishes a statistical classification from a nomenclature, which 
must have a separate title for each known morbid condition. The concepts of classification and 
nomenclature are nevertheless closely related because a nomenclature is often arranged systematically. 
A statistical classification can allow for different levels  of detail if it has a hierarchical structure with 
subdivisions. A statistical classification of diseases should retain the ability both to identify specific 
disease entities and to allow statistical presentation of data for broader groups, to enable useful and 
understandable information to be obtained. 
The same general principles can be applied to the classification of other health problems and reasons 
for contact with health care services, which are also incorporated in the ICD. 
The ICD has developed as a practical, rather than a purely theoretical classification, in which there are 
a number of compromises between classification based on etiology, anatomical site, circumstances of 
onset, etc. There have also been ad justments to meet the variety of statistical applications for which 
the ICD is designed, such as mortality, morbidity, so cial security and other types of health statistics 
and surveys. 
2.4 The basic structure and principl es of classification of the ICD 
The ICD is a variable-axis classification. The struct ure has developed out of that proposed by William 
Farr in the early days of international discussions on classification structure. His scheme was that, for 
all practical, epidemiological purposes, statistical data on diseases should be grouped in the following 
way: 
• epidemic diseases 
• constitutional or general diseases 
• local diseases arranged by site 
• developmental diseases 
• injuries. 
This pattern can be identified in the chapters of ICD-10. It has stood the test of time and, though in 
some ways arbitrary, is still regarded as a more useful structure for general epidemiological purposes 
than any of the alternatives tested. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
DESCRIPTION OF THE ICD 
11 
The first two, and the last two, of the groups listed above comprise “special groups”, which bring 
together conditions that would be inconveniently a rranged for epidemiological study were they to be 
scattered, for instance in a classification arranged pr imarily by anatomical site. The remaining group, 
“local diseases arranged by site”, includes the ICD chapters for each of the main body systems. 
The distinction between the “special groups” chapters  and the “body systems” chapters has practical 
implications for understanding the structure of the cl assification, for coding to it, and for interpreting 
statistics based on it. It has to be remembered that, in general, conditions are primarily classified to 
one of the “special groups” chapters. Where ther e is any doubt as to where a condition should be 
positioned, the “special groups” chapters should take priority. 
The basic ICD is a single coded list of three-character  categories, each of which can be further divided 
into up to ten four-character subcategories. In pl ace of the purely numeric coding system of previous 
revisions, the Tenth Revision uses an alphanumeric code with a letter in the first position and a 
number in the second, third and fourth positions. The fourth character follows a decimal point. 
Possible code numbers therefore range from A00.0 to Z99.9. The letter U is not used (see 2.4.7). 
2.4.1 Volumes 
ICD-10 comprises three volumes: Volume 1 contains the main classifications; Volume 2 provides 
guidance to users of the ICD; and Volume 3 is the Alphabetical Index to the classification. 
Most of Volume 1 is taken up with the main classi fication, composed of the list of three-character 
categories and the tabular list of inclusions and f our-character subcategories. The “core” classification 
- the list of three-character categories (Volume 1) - is the mandatory level for reporting to the WHO 
mortality database and for general international comp arisons. This core classification also lists chapter 
and block titles. The tabular list, giving the full detail of the four-character level, is divided into 21 
chapters. 
Volume 1 also contains the following: 
• Morphology of neoplasms. The classification of morphology of neoplasms may be used, if desired, 
as an additional code to classify the morphological type for neoplasms which, with a few 
exceptions, are classified in Chapter II only according to behaviour and site (topography). The 
morphology codes are the same as those used in the special adaptation of the ICD for oncology 
(ICD-O) (1). 
• Special tabulation lists. Because the full four-character list of the ICD, and even the three-character 
list, are too long to be presented in every statistical  table, most routine statistics use a tabulation list 
that emphasizes certain single conditions and groups ot hers. The four special lists for the tabulation 
of mortality are an integral part of the ICD. List s 1 and 2 are for general mo rtality and lists 3 and 4 
are for infant and child mortality (ages 0 - 4 y ears). There is also a special tabulation list for 
morbidity. These are set out in Volume 1. Guidance on the appropriate use of the various levels of 
the classification and the tabulation lists is given in section 5 of this volume. 
• Definitions. The definitions in Volume 1 have been adopted by the World Health Assembly and are 
included to facilitate the international comparability of data.  
• Nomenclature regulations . The regulations adopted by the World Health Assembly set out the 
formal responsibilities of WHO Member States regarding the classification of diseases and causes 
of death, and the compilation and publication of statistics. They are found in Volume 1. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
12 
2.4.2 Chapters 
The classification is divided into 21 chapters. The firs t character of the ICD code is a letter, and each 
letter is associated with a particular chapter, except for the letter D, which is used in both Chapter II, 
Neoplasms, and Chapter III, Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and certain disorders 
involving the immune mechanism, and the letter H, which is used in both Chapter VII, Diseases of the 
eye and adnexa and Chapter VIII, Diseases of the ear and mastoid process. Four chapters (Chapters I, 
II, XIX, and XX) use more than one letter in the first position of their codes. 
Each chapter contains sufficient th ree-character categories to cover its content; not all available codes 
are used, allowing space for future revision and expansion. 
Chapters I to XVII relate to diseases and other mo rbid conditions, and Chapter XIX to injuries, 
poisoning and certain other consequences of extern al causes. The remaining chapters complete the 
range of subject matter nowadays included in dia gnostic data. Chapter XVIII covers Symptoms, signs 
and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified. Chap ter XX, External causes 
of morbidity and mortality, was traditionally used to  classify causes of injury and poisoning, but, since 
the Ninth Revision, has also provided for any r ecorded external cause of diseases and other morbid 
conditions. Finally, Chapter XXI, Factors influencing h ealth status and contact with health services, is 
intended for the classification of data explaining the reason for contact with health care services of a 
person not currently sick, or the circumstances in whic h the patient is receiving care at that particular 
time or otherwise having some bearing on that person’s care. 
2.4.3 Blocks of categories 
The chapters are subdivided into homogeneous “block s” of three-character categories. In Chapter I, 
the block titles reflect two axes of classification - mode of transmission and broad group of infecting 
organisms. In Chapter II, the first axis is the beha viour of the neoplasm; within behaviour, the axis is 
mainly by site, although a few three-character categories are provided for important morphological 
types (e.g. leukaemias, lymphomas, melanomas, m esotheliomas, Kaposi’s sarcoma). The range of 
categories is given in parentheses after each block title. 
2.4.4 Three-character categories 
Within each block, some of the three-character categories are for single conditions, selected because of 
their frequency, severity or susceptibility to public hea lth intervention, while others are for groups of 
diseases with some common characteristic. There is usually provision for “other” conditions to be 
classified, allowing many different but rarer cond itions, as well as “unspecified” conditions, to be 
included. 
2.4.5 Four-character subcategories 
Although not mandatory for reporting at the internationa l level, most of the three-character categories 
are subdivided by means of a fourth, numeric character after a decimal point, allowing up to ten 
subcategories. Where a three-character category is  not subdivided, it is recommended that the letter 
“X” be used to fill the fourth position so that the codes are of a standard length for data-processing. 
The four-character subcategories are used in wh atever way is most appropriate, identifying, for 
example, different sites or varieties if the three- character category is for a single disease, or individual 
diseases if the three-character category is for a group of conditions. 
The fourth character .8 is generally used for “other” conditions belonging to the three-character 
category, and .9 is mostly used to convey th e same meaning as the three-character category title, 
without adding any additional information. 
When the same fourth-character subdivisions apply to  a range of three-character categories, they are 
listed once only, at the start of the range. A note at  each of the relevant categories indicates where the 
details are to be found. For example, categories O03-O06, for different types of abortion, have 
common fourth characters relating to associated complications (see Volume 1). 

--- PAGE 19 ---
DESCRIPTION OF THE ICD 
13 
2.4.6 Supplementary subdivisions for use at the fifth or subsequent character level 
The fifth and subsequent character levels are usua lly subclassifications along a different axis from the 
fourth character. They are found in: 
Chapter XIII - subdivisions by anatomical site 
Chapter XIX - subdivisions to indicate open and closed fractures as well as intracranial, 
intrathoracic and intra-abdominal injuries with and without open wound 
Chapter XX - subdivisions to indicate the type of activity being undertaken at the time of the 
event. 
2.4.7 The unused “U” codes 
Codes U00-U49 are to be used for the provisiona l assignment of new diseases of uncertain etiology. 
Codes U50-U99 may be used in research, e.g. when  testing an alternative subclassification for a 
special project. 

--- PAGE 20 ---


--- PAGE 21 ---
 
15 
3. How to use the ICD 
This section contains practical information which all users need to know in order to exploit the 
classification to its full advantage. Knowledge a nd understanding of the purpose and structure of the 
ICD are vital for statisticians and analysts of h ealth information as well as for coders. Accurate and 
consistent use of the ICD depends on the correct application of all three volumes. 
3.1 How to use Volume 1 
3.1.1 Introduction 
Volume 1 of the ICD contains the classification itsel f. It indicates the categories into which diagnoses 
are to be allocated, facilitating their sorting and coun ting for statistical purposes. It also provides those 
using statistics with a definition of the content of the categories, subcategories and tabulation list items 
they may find included in statistical tables. 
Although it is theoretically possible for a coder to arri ve at the correct code by the use of Volume 1 
alone, this would be time-consuming and could lead to errors in assignment. An Alphabetical Index as 
a guide to the classification is contained in Volume 3. The Introduction to the Index provides 
important information about its relationship with Volume 1. 
Most routine statistical uses of the ICD involve th e selection of a single condition from a certificate or 
record where more than one is entered. The rul es for this selection in relation to mortality and 
morbidity are contained in Section 4 of this Volume. 
A detailed description of the tabular list is given in Section 2.4. 
3.1.2 Use of the tabular list of inclusions and four-character subcategories 
Inclusion terms 
Within the three- and four-character rubrics 1, there are usually listed a number of other diagnostic 
terms. These are known as “inclusion terms” and are given, in addition to the title, as examples of the 
diagnostic statements to be classified to that rubr ic. They may refer to different conditions or be 
synonyms. They are not a subclassification of the rubric. 
Inclusion terms are listed primarily as a guide to the content of the rubrics. Many of the items listed 
relate to important or common terms belonging to th e rubric. Others are borderline conditions or sites 
listed to distinguish the boundary between one subcat egory and another. The lists of inclusion terms 
are by no means exhaustive and alternative na mes of diagnostic entities are included in the 
Alphabetical Index, which should be referred to first when coding a given diagnostic statement. 
It is sometimes necessary to read inclusion terms in conjunction with titles. This usually occurs when 
the inclusion terms are elaborating lists of sit es or pharmaceutical products, where appropriate words 
from the title (e.g. “malignant neoplasm of ...”, “i njury to ...”, “poisoning by ...”) need to be 
understood. 
General diagnostic descriptions common to a range of  categories, or to all the subcategories in a 
three-character category, are to be found in notes h eaded “Includes”, immediately following a chapter, 
block or category title. 
                                                      
1 In the context of the ICD, “rubric” denotes either a th ree-character category or a four-character subcategory. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
16 
Exclusion terms 
Certain rubrics contain lists of conditions preceded  by the word “Excludes”. These are terms which, 
although the rubric title might suggest that they were  to be classified there, are in fact classified 
elsewhere. An example of this is in category A 46, “Erysipelas”, where postpartum or puerperal 
erysipelas is excluded. Following each excluded term, in parentheses, is the category or subcategory 
code elsewhere in the classification to which the excluded term should be allocated. 
General exclusions for a range of categories or for all subcategories in a three-character category are to 
be found in notes headed “Excludes”, immediately following a chapter, block or category title. 
Glossary descriptions 
In addition to inclusion and exclusion terms, Ch apter V, Mental and behavioural disorders, uses 
glossary descriptions to indicate the content of rubri cs. This device is used because the terminology of 
mental disorders varies greatly, particularly betw een different countries, and the same name may be 
used to describe quite different conditions. The glossary is not intended for use by coding staff. 
Similar types of definition are given elsewhere in the ICD, for example, Chapter XXI, to clarify the 
intended content of a rubric. 
3.1.3 Two codes for certain conditions  
The “dagger and asterisk” system 
ICD-9 introduced a system, continued in ICD-10,  whereby there are two codes for diagnostic 
statements containing information about both an underlying generalized disease and a manifestation in 
a particular organ or site which is a clinical problem in its own right. 
The primary code is for the underlying disease and is marked with a dagger (†); an optional additional 
code for the manifestation is marked with an asterisk (*). This convention was provided because 
coding to underlying disease alone was often unsatis factory for compiling statistics relating to 
particular specialties, where there was a desire to see the condition classified to the relevant chapter for 
the manifestation when it was the reason for medical care. 
While the dagger and asterisk system provides a lternative classifications for the presentation of 
statistics, it is a principle of the ICD that the dagger code is the primary code and must always be used. 
Provision should be made for the asterisk code to be used in addition  if the alternative method of 
presentation may also be required. For coding, the ast erisk code must never be used alone. Statistics 
incorporating the dagger codes conform with th e traditional classification for presenting data on 
mortality and morbidity and other aspects of medical care. 
Asterisk codes appear as three-character categor ies. There are separate categories for the same 
conditions occurring when a particular disease is not  specified as the underlying cause. For example, 
categories G20 and G21 are for forms of Parkinsonism that are not manifestations of other diseases 
assigned elsewhere, while category G22
* is for “Parkinsonism in diseases classified elsewhere”. 
Corresponding dagger codes are given for conditions me ntioned in asterisk categories; for example, 
for Syphilitic parkinsonism in G22*, the dagger code is A52.1†. 
Some dagger codes appear in special dagger categor ies. More often, however, the dagger code for 
dual-element diagnoses and unmarked codes for singl e-element conditions may be derived from the 
same category or subcategory. 
The areas of the classification where the dagger and asterisk system operates are limited; there are 83 
special asterisk categories throughout the classification, which are listed at the start of the relevant 
chapters. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
HOW TO USE THE ICD 
17 
Rubrics in which dagger-marked terms appear may take one of three different forms: 
(i) If the symbol (†) and the alternative asterisk c ode both appear in the rubric heading, all terms 
classifiable to that rubric are subject to dua l classification and all have the same alternative 
code, e.g. 
A17.0† Tuberculous meningitis (G01 *) 
Tuberculosis of meninges (cerebral) (spinal) 
Tuberculous leptomeningitis 
(ii) If the symbol appears in the rubric heading but the alternative asterisk code does not, all terms 
classifiable to that rubric are subject to dual classification but they have different alternative 
codes (which are listed for each term), e.g. 
A18.1† Tuberculosis of genitourinary system 
Tuberculosis of: 
• bladder (N33.0
*) 
• cervix (N74.0*) 
• kidney (N29.1*) 
• male genital organs (N51.-*) 
• ureter (N29.1*) 
Tuberculous female pelvic inflammatory disease (N74.1*) 
 (iii) If neither the symbol nor the alternative code  appear in the title, the rubric as a whole is not 
subject to dual classification but individual inclusion terms may be; if so, these terms will be 
marked with the symbol and their alternative codes given, e.g. 
A54.8 Other gonococcal infections 
Gonococcal: 
... 
• peritonitis† (K67.1
*) 
• pneumonia† (J17.0*) 
• septicaemia 
• skin lesions 
Other optional dual coding 
There are certain situations, other than in the dagge r and asterisk system, that permit two ICD codes to 
be used to describe fully a person’s condition. The note in the tabular list, “Use additional code, if 
desired ...”, identifies many of these situations. Th e additional codes would be used only in special 
tabulations. 
These are: 
(i) for local infections, classifiable to the “body  systems” chapters, codes from Chapter I may be 
added to identify the infecting organism, where th is information does not appear in the title of 
the rubric. A block of categories, B95-B97, is provided for this purpose in Chapter I. 
(ii) for neoplasms with functional activity. To  the code from Chapter II may be added the 
appropriate code from Chapter IV to indicate the type of functional activity. 
(iii) for neoplasms, the morphology code from Volume 1, although not part of the main ICD, may 
be added to the Chapter II code to identify the morphological type of the tumour. 
(iv) for conditions classifiable to F00-F09 (Organic, including symptomatic, mental disorders) in 
Chapter V, where a code from another chapter may be added to indicate the cause, i.e. the 
underlying disease, injury or other insult to the brain. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
18 
(v) where a condition is caused by a toxic agen t, a code from Chapter XX may be added to 
identify that agent. 
(vi) where two codes can be used  to describe an injury, poisoning or other adverse effect: a code 
from Chapter XIX, which describes the nature of the injury, and a code from Chapter XX, 
which describes the cause. The choice as to which code should be  the additional code depends 
upon the purpose for which the data are being co llected. (See introduction to Chapter XX, of 
Volume 1.) 
3.1.4 Conventions used in the tabular list 
In listing inclusion and exclusion terms in the tabul ar list, the ICD employs some special conventions 
relating to the use of parentheses, square bracket s, colons, braces, the abbreviation “NOS”, the phrase 
“not elsewhere classified” (NEC), and the word “a nd” in titles. These need to be clearly understood 
both by coders and by anyone wishing to interpret statistics based on the ICD. 
Parentheses (   ) 
Parentheses are used in Volume 1 in four important situations. 
(a) Parentheses are used to enclose supplementa ry words, which may follow a diagnostic term 
without affecting the code number to which the words outside the parentheses would be 
assigned. For example, in I10 the inclusion term, “Hypertension (arterial) (benign) (essential) 
(malignant) (primary) (systemic)”, implies that I10 is the code number for the word 
“Hypertension” alone or when qualified by any, or any combination, of the words in 
parentheses. 
(b) Parentheses are also used to en close the code to which an exclusion term refers. For example,  
H01.0 Blepharitis 
 Excludes: blepharoconjunctivitis (H10.5). 
(c) Another use of parentheses is in the block titles, to enclose the three-character codes of 
categories included in that block. 
(d) The last use of parentheses was incorporated in  the Ninth Revision and is related to the dagger 
and asterisk system. Parentheses are used to encl ose the dagger code in an asterisk category or 
the asterisk code following a dagger term. 
Square brackets [    ] 
Square brackets are used: 
(a) for enclosing synonyms, alternative words or explanatory phrases; for example,  
A30 Leprosy [Hansen’s disease]; 
(b) for referring to previous notes; for example,  
C00.8 Overlapping lesion of lip [See note 5 at the beginning of this chapter]; 
(c) for referring to a previously stated set of fourth character subdivisions common to a number of 
categories; for example,  
K27 Peptic ulcer, site unspecified [See before K25 for subdivisions]. 
Colon : 
A colon is used in listings of inclusion and excl usion terms when the words that precede it are not 
complete terms for assignment to that rubric. They require one or more of the modifying or qualifying 
words indented under them before they can be assigne d to the rubric. For example, in K36, “Other 

--- PAGE 25 ---
HOW TO USE THE ICD 
19 
appendicitis”, the diagnosis “appendicitis” is to be  classified there only if qualified by the words 
“chronic” or “recurrent”. 
Brace } 
A brace is used in listings of inclusion and exclus ion terms to indicate that neither the words that 
precede it nor the words after it are complete term s. Any of the terms before the brace should be 
qualified by one or more of the terms that follow it. For example:  
O71.6 Obstetric damage to pelvic joints and ligaments 
 Avulsion of inner symphyseal cartilage  
 Damage to coccyx obstetric 
 Traumatic separation o f symphysis (pubis)  
“NOS” 
The letters NOS are an abbreviation for “not ot herwise specified”, implying “unspecified” or 
“unqualified”. 
Sometimes an unqualified term is nevertheless classified to a rubric for a more specific type of the 
condition. This is because, in medical terminology, the most common form of a condition is often 
known by the name of the condition itself and only the less common types are qualified. For example, 
“mitral stenosis” is commonly used to mean “rhe umatic mitral stenosis”. These inbuilt assumptions 
have to be taken into account in order to avoid incorrect classification. Careful inspection of inclusion 
terms will reveal where an assumption of cause has been  made; coders should be careful not to code a 
term as unqualified unless it is quite clear that no info rmation is available that would permit a more 
specific assignment elsewhere. Similarly, in interpre ting statistics based on the ICD, some conditions 
assigned to an apparently specified category will not have been so specified on the record that was 
coded. When comparing trends over time and interpre ting statistics, it is important to be aware that 
assumptions may change from one revision of the IC D to another. For example, before the Eighth 
Revision, an unqualified aortic aneurysm was assumed to be due to syphilis. 
“Not elsewhere classified” 
The words “not elsewhere classified”, when used in a three-character category title, serve as a warning 
that certain specified variants of the listed conditi ons may appear in other parts of the classification. 
For example: 
J16 Pneumonia due to other infectious organisms, not elsewhere classified 
This category includes J16.0 Chlamydial pneumoni a and J16.8 Pneumonia due to other specified 
infectious organisms. Many other categories are pr ovided in Chapter X  (for example, J10-J15) and 
other chapters (for example, P23.- Congenital pneum onia) for pneumonias due to specified infectious 
organisms. J18 Pneumonia, organism unspecified, accommodates pneumonias for which the infectious 
agent is not stated. 
“And” in titles 
“And” stands for “and/or”. For example, in the rubr ic A18.0, Tuberculosis of bones and joints, are to 
be classified cases of “tuberculosis of bones”, “tuberc ulosis of joints” and “tuberculosis of bones and 
joints”. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
20 
Point dash.- 
In some cases, the fourth character of a subcategory code is replaced by a dash, e.g. 
G03 Meningitis due to other and unspecified causes, 
Excludes: meningoencephalitis (G04.-) 
This indicates to the coder that a fourth character  exists and should be s ought in the appropriate 
category. This convention is used in both the tabular list and the alphabetical index. 
3.1.5 Categories with common characteristics 
For quality control it is useful to introduce pr ogrammed checks into the computer system. The 
following groups of categories are provided as a b asis for such checks on internal consistency, 
grouped according to the special characteristic that unites them. 
Asterisk categories 
The following asterisk categories are not to be used al one; they must always be used in addition to a 
dagger code: 
D63*, D77*, E35*, E90*, F00*, F02*, G01*, G02*, G05*, G07*, G13*, G22*, G26*, G32*, G46*, G53*, 
G55*, G59*, G63*, G73*, G94*, G99*, H03*, H06*, H13*, H19*, H22*, H28*, H32*, H36*, H42*, H45*, 
H48*, H58 *, H62 *, H67 *, H75 *, H82 *, H94 *, I32 *, I39 *, I41 *, I43 *, I52 *, I68 *, I79 *, I98 *, J17 *, J91 *, 
J99*, K23*, K67*, K77*, K87*, K93*, L14*, L45*, L54*, L62*, L86*, L99*, M01*, M03*, M07*, M09*, 
M14*, M36 *, M49 *, M63 *, M68 *, M73 *, M82 *, M90 *, N08 *, N16 *, N22 *, N29 *, N33 *, N37 *, N51 *, 
N74*, N77*, P75* 
Categories limited to one sex 
The following categories apply only to males: 
B26.0, C60-C63, D07.4-D07.6, D17. 6, D29.-, D40.-, E29.-, E89.5, F52.4, I86.1, L29.1, N40-N51, 
Q53-Q55, R86, S31.2-S31.3, Z12.5. 
The following categories apply only to females: 
A34, B37.3, C51-C58, C79.6, D06. -, D07.0-D07.3, D25-D28, D39.-, E28.-, E89.4, F52.5, F53.-, 
I86.3, L29.2, L70.5, M80.0-M80.1, M81.0-M81.1, M83.0, N70-N98, N99.2-N 99.3, O00-O99, P54.6, 
Q50-Q52, R87, S31.4, S37.4-S37.6, T19.2-T19.3, T 83.3, Y76.-, Z01.4, Z12.4, Z30.1, Z30.3, Z30.5, 
Z31.1, Z31.2, Z32-Z36, Z39.-, Z43.7, Z87.5, Z97.5. 
Guidance for handling inconsistencies between conditions and sex is given at 4.2.5. 
Sequelae categories 
The following categories are provided for sequelae of conditions that are no longer in an active phase: 
B90-B94, E64.-, E68, G09, I69.-, O97, T90-T98, Y85-Y89. 
Guidance for coding sequelae for both mortality and morbidity purposes can be found at 4.2.4 and 
4.4.2. 
Postprocedural disorders 
The following categories are not to be used for underlying-cause mortality coding. Guidance for their 
use in morbidity coding is found at 4.4.2. 
E89.-, G97.-, H59.-, H95.-, I97.-, J95.-, K91.-, M96.-, N99.-. 

--- PAGE 27 ---
HOW TO USE THE ICD 
21 
3.2 How to use Volume 3  
The Introduction to Volume 3, the Alphabetical Index to ICD-10, gives instructions on how to use it. 
These instructions should be studied carefully befo re starting to code. A brief description of the 
structure and use of the Index is given below. 
3.2.1 Arrangement of the Alphabetical Index 
Volume 3 is divided into three sections as follows: 
• Section I lists all the terms classifiable to Chap ters I-XIX and Chapter XXI, except drugs and other 
chemicals. 
• Section II is the index of external causes of morb idity and mortality and contains all the terms 
classifiable to Chapter XX, except drugs and other chemicals. 
• Section III, the Table of Drugs and Chemicals, lis ts for each substance the codes for poisonings and 
adverse effects of drugs classifiable to Chapte r XIX, and the Chapter XX codes that indicate 
whether the poisoning was accidental,  deliberate (self-harm), undetermined, or an adverse effect of 
a correct substance properly administered. 
3.2.2 Structure 
The Index contains “lead terms”, positioned to th e far left of the column, with other words 
(“modifiers” or “qualifiers”) at different levels of  indentation under them. In Section I, these indented 
modifiers or qualifiers are usually varieties, sites or circumstances that affect coding; in Section II they 
indicate different types of accident or occurrence, vehicles involved, etc. Modifiers that do not affect 
coding appear in parentheses after the condition. 
3.2.3 Code numbers 
The code numbers that follow the terms refer to th e categories and subcategories to which the terms 
should be classified. If the code has only three char acters, it can be assumed that the category has not 
been subdivided. In most instances where the cate gory has been subdivided, the code number in the 
Index will give the fourth character. A dash in th e fourth position (e.g. O03.-) means that the category 
has been subdivided and that the fourth character can be found by referring to the tabular list. If the 
dagger and asterisk system applies to the term, both codes are given. 
3.2.4 Conventions 
Parentheses 
Parentheses are used in the Index in the same way as in Volume 1, i.e. to enclose modifiers. 
“NEC” 
NEC (not elsewhere classified) indicates that specifi ed variants of the listed condition are classified 
elsewhere, and that, where appropriate, a more precise term should be looked for in the Index. 
Cross-references 
Cross-references are used to avoid unnecessary dupli cation of terms in the Index. The word “see” 
requires the coder to refer to the other term; “see also ” directs the coder to refer elsewhere in the Index 
if the statement being coded contains other inform ation that is not found indented under the term to 
which “see also” is attached. 
3.3 Basic coding guidelines 
The Alphabetical Index contains many terms not in cluded in Volume 1, and coding requires that both 
the Index and the Tabular List should be consulted before a code is assigned. 

--- PAGE 28 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
22 
Before attempting to code, the coder needs to know  the principles of classification and coding and to 
have carried out practical exercises. 
The following is a simple guide intended to assist the occasional user of the ICD. 
1. Identify the type of statement to be coded and re fer to the appropriate section of the Alphabetical 
Index. (If the statement is a disease or injury or ot her condition classifiable to Chapters I - XIX or 
XXI, consult Section I of the Index. If the statemen t is the external cause of an injury or other 
event classifiable to Chapter XX, consult Section II.) 
2. Locate the lead term. For diseases and injuries this is usually a noun for the pathological 
condition. However, some conditions expressed as adjectives or eponyms are included in the 
Index as lead terms. 
3. Read and be guided by any note that appears under the lead term. 
4. Read any terms enclosed in pare ntheses after the lead term (these modifiers do not affect the code 
number), as well as any terms indented under the lead term (these modifiers may affect the code 
number), until all the words in the diagnostic expression have been accounted for. 
5. Follow carefully any cross-references (“see” and “see also”) found in the Index. 
6. Refer to the tabular list to verify the suitab ility of the code number selected. Note that a 
three-character code in the Index with a dash in  the fourth position means that there is a fourth 
character to be found in Volume 1. Further subdivi sions to be used in a supplementary character 
position are not indexed and, if used, must be located in Volume 1. 
7. Be guided by any inclusion or exclusion terms unde r the selected code or under the chapter, block 
or category heading. 
8. Assign the code. 
Specific guidelines for the selection of the cause or condition to be coded, and for coding the condition 
selected, are given in Section 4. 

--- PAGE 29 ---
 
23 
4. Rules and guidelines for mortality and morbidity 
coding 
This section concerns the rules and guidelines adopt ed by the World Health Assembly regarding the 
selection of a single cause or condition for routine tabulation from death certificates and morbidity 
records. Guidelines are also provided for the appli cation of the rules and for coding of the condition 
selected for tabulation. 
4.1 Mortality: guidelines for certification and rules for coding 
Mortality statistics are one of the principal sources of health information and in many countries they 
are the most reliable type of health data. 
4.1.1 Causes of death 
In 1967, the Twentieth World Health Assembly de fined the causes of death to be entered on the 
medical certificate of cause of death as “all those di seases, morbid conditions or injuries which either 
resulted in or contributed to death and the circ umstances of the accident or violence which produced 
any such injuries”. The purpose of the definition is to ensure that all the relevant information is 
recorded and that the certifier does not select so me conditions for entry and reject others. The 
definition does not include symptoms and modes of dying, such as heart failure or respiratory failure. 
When only one cause of death is recorded, this cause is selected for tabulation. When more than one 
cause of death is recorded, selection should be ma de in accordance with the rules given in section 
4.1.5. The rules are based on the concept of the underlying cause of death. 
4.1.2 Underlying cause of death 
It was agreed by the Sixth Decennial Internati onal Revision Conference that the cause of death for 
primary tabulation should be designated the underlying cause of death. 
From the standpoint of prevention of death, it is n ecessary to break the chain of events or to effect a 
cure at some point. The most effective public h ealth objective is to prevent the precipitating cause 
from operating. For this purpose, the underlying cause has been defined as “(a) the disease or injury 
which initiated the train of morbid events leading di rectly to death, or (b) the circumstances of the 
accident or violence which produced the fatal injury”. 
4.1.3 International form of medical certificate of cause of death 
The above principle can be applied uniformly by using the medical certification form recommended 
by the World Health Assembly. It is the responsibility of the medical practitioner signing the death 
certificate to indicate which morbid conditions led directly to death and to state any antecedent 
conditions giving rise to this cause. 
The medical certificate shown below is designed to facilitate the selection of the underlying cause of 
death when two or more causes are recorded. Part I of the form is for diseases related to the train of 
events leading directly to death, and Part II is for unrelated but contributory conditions. 

--- PAGE 30 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
24 
The medical practitioner or other qualified certifier should use his or her clinical judgement in 
completing the medical certificate of cause of death. Automated systems must not include lists or other 
prompts to guide the certifier as these necessarily limit the range of diagnoses and therefore have an 
adverse effect on the accuracy and usefulness of the report. 
In 1990, the Forty-third World Health Assembly adopted a recommendation that, where a need had 
been identified, countries should consider the possibility  of an additional line, (d), in Part I of the 
certificate. However, countries may adopt, or continue to use, a certificate with only three lines in Part 
I where a fourth line is unnecessary, or where there ar e legal or other impediments to the adoption of 
the certificate shown above. 
The condition recorded on the lowest used line of Part I of the certificate is usually the underlying 
cause of death used for tabulation. However, the procedures described in sections 4.1.4-4.1.5 may 
result in the selection of another condition as the unde rlying cause of death. To differentiate between 
these two possibilities, the expression originating antecedent cause (originating cause) will be used to 
refer to the condition proper to the last used lin e of Part I of the certificate, and the expression 
underlying cause of death will be used to identify the cause selected for tabulation. 
If there is only one step in the chain of events, an en try at line I(a) is sufficient. If there is more than 
one step, the direct cause is entered at (a) and the originating antecedent cause is entered last, with any 
intervening cause entered on line (b) or on lines (b) a nd (c). An example of a death certificate with 
four steps in the chain of events leading directly to death is: 
(a) Pulmonary embolism 
(b) Pathological fracture 
(c) Secondary carcinoma of femur 
(d) Carcinoma of breast 
Part II is for any other significant condition that c ontributed to the fatal outcome, but was not related 
to the disease or condition directly causing death. 
After the words “due to (or as a consequence of)”, which appear on the certificate, should be included 
not only the direct cause or pathological process, but also indirect causes, for example where an 
antecedent condition has predisposed to the direct  cause by damage to tissues or impairment of 
function, even after a long interval. 


--- PAGE 31 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
25 
Noting the approximate interval (minutes, hours, days, weeks, months or years) between the onset of 
each condition and the date of death helps the certifyi ng doctor to establish the chain of events that led 
to the death, and is also useful subsequently in guiding the coder to choose the appropriate code. 
In 1990, the World Health Assembly adopted a recommendation that countries should consider the 
inclusion on death certificates of questions about cu rrent pregnancy and pre gnancy within one year 
preceding death. 
4.1.4 Procedures for selection of the underlying cause of death for mortality 
tabulation 
When only one cause of death is reported, this cause is used for tabulation. 
When more than one cause of death is recorded, th e first step in selecting the underlying cause is to 
determine the originating antecedent cause proper to the lowest used line in Part I of the certificate by 
application of the General Principle or of selection rules 1, 2 and 3. 
In some circumstances the ICD allows the originating cause to be superseded by one  more suitable for 
expressing the underlying cause in tabulation. Fo r example, there are some categories for 
combinations of conditions, or there may be overriding epidemiological reasons for giving precedence 
to other conditions on the certificate. 
The next step therefore is to determine whether one or more of the modification rules A to F (see 
section 4.1.9), which deal with the above situations, apply. The resultant code number for tabulation is 
that of the underlying cause. 
Where the originating antecedent cause is an injury or other effect of  an external cause classified to 
Chapter XIX, the circumstances that gave rise to  that condition should be selected as the underlying 
cause for tabulation and coded to V01-Y89. The code  for the injury or effect may be used as an 
additional code. 
4.1.5 Rules for selection of the originating antecedent cause 
Sequence 
The term “sequence” refers to two or more cond itions entered on successive lines of Part I, each 
condition being an acceptable cause of the one entered on the line above it. 
Example 1: I (a) Bleeding of oesophageal varices 
 (b) Portal hypertension 
 (c) Liver cirrhosis 
 (d) Hepatitis B 
If there is more than one cause of death in a line of the certificate, it is possible to have more than one 
reported sequence. In the example below, four sequences are reported: 
Example 2: I (a) Coma 
 (b) Myocardial infarction and cerebrovascular accident 
 (c) Atherosclerosis  Hypertension  
The sequences are: 
• atherosclerosis (leading to) myocardial infarction (leading to) coma; 
• atherosclerosis (leading to) cerebr ovascular accident (leading to) coma; 
• hypertension  (leading to) myocardial infarction (leading to) coma; 
• hypertension  (leading to) cerebrovascular accident (leading to) coma; 

--- PAGE 32 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
26 
General Principle 
The General Principle states that when more than  one condition is entered on the certificate, the 
condition entered alone on the lowest used line of Pa rt I should be selected only if it could have given 
rise to all the conditions entered above it. 
Selection rules 
Rule 1. If the General Principle does not apply and th ere is a reported sequence terminating in the 
condition first entered on the certificate, select th e originating cause of this sequence. If there 
is more than one sequence terminating in the condition mentioned first, select the originating 
cause of the first-mentioned sequence. 
Rule 2. If there is no reported sequence terminating in  the condition first entered on the certificate, 
select this first-mentioned condition. 
Rule 3. If the condition selected by the General Principle or by Rule l or Rule 2 is obviously a direct 
consequence of another reported condition, whethe r in Part I or Part II, select this primary 
condition. 
4.1.6 Some considerations on selection rules 
In a properly completed certificate, the originati ng antecedent cause will have been entered alone on 
the lowest used line of Part I and the conditions, if any, that arose as a consequence of this initial cause 
will have been entered above it, one condition to a line in ascending causal order. 
Example 3: I (a) Uraemia 
 (b) Hydronephrosis 
 (c) Retention of urine 
 (d) Hypertrophy of prostate 
Example 4: I (a) Bronchopneumonia 
 (b) Chronic bronchitis 
II Chronic myocarditis 
In a properly completed certificate, therefore, the Ge neral Principle will apply. However, even if the 
certificate has not been properly completed, the Ge neral Principle may still apply provided that the 
condition entered alone on the lowest used line of Pa rt I could have given rise to all the conditions 
above it, even though the conditions entered above it have not been entered in the correct causal order. 
Example 5: I (a) Generalized metastases 5 weeks 
 (b) Bronchopneumonia 3 days 
 (c) Lung cancer  11 months 
The General Principle does not apply when more th an one condition has been entered on the lowest 
used line of Part I, or if the single condition ente red could not have given rise to all the conditions 
entered above it. Guidance on the acceptability of differe nt sequences is given at the end of the rules, 
but it should be borne in mind that the medical certifier’s statement reflects an informed opinion about 
the conditions leading to death and about their interrelationships, and s hould not be disregarded 
lightly. 
Where the General Principle cannot be applied, cl arification of the certificate should be sought from 
the certifier whenever possible, since the selection rules are somewhat arbitrary and may not always 
lead to a satisfactory selection of the underlying cause. Where further clarification cannot be obtained, 
however, the selection rules must be applied. Rule l is applicable only if there is a reported sequence, 
terminating in the condition first entered on the cer tificate. If such a sequence is not found, Rule 2 
applies and the first-entered condition is selected. 
The condition selected by the above rules may, however, be an obvious consequence of another 
condition that was not reported in a correct causal relationship with it, e.g. in Part II or on the same 
line in Part I. If so, Rule 3 applies and the orig inating primary condition is selected. It applies, 

--- PAGE 33 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
27 
however, only when there is no doubt about the causal  relationship between the two conditions; it is 
not sufficient that a causal relationship between th em would have been accepted if the certifier had 
reported it. 
4.1.7 Examples of the General Principle and selection rules 
General Principle   
When more than one condition is entered on the certificate, select the condition entered alone on 
the lowest used line of Part I only if it could have given rise to all the conditions entered above it. 
Example 6: I (a) Abscess of lung 
 (b) Lobar pneumonia 
Select lobar pneumonia (J18.1). 
Example 7: I (a) Hepatic failure 
 (b) Bile duct obstruction 
 (c) Carcinoma of head of pancreas 
Select carcinoma of head of pancreas (C25.0). 
Example 8: I (a) Cerebral haemorrhage 
 (b) Hypertension 
 (c) Chronic pyelonephritis  
 (d) Prostatic adenoma 
Select prostatic adenoma (N40). 
Example 9: I (a) Traumatic shock 
 (b) Multiple fractures 
 (c) Pedestrian hit by truck (traffic accident) 
Select pedestrian hit by truck (V04.1). 
Example 10: I (a) Bronchopneumonia 
II Secondary anaemia and chronic lymphatic leukaemia 
Select bronchopneumonia. But Rule 3 also applies; see Example 26. 
Rule 1  
If the General Principle does not apply and th ere is a reported sequence terminating in the 
condition first entered on the certificate, select th e originating cause of this sequence. If there is 
more than one sequence terminating in the condition mentioned first, select the originating cause 
of the first-mentioned sequence. 
Example 11: I (a) Bronchopneumonia 
 (b) Cerebral infarction and hypertensive heart disease 
Select cerebral infarction (I63.9). There ar e two reported sequences terminating in the 
condition first entered on the certificate;  bronchopneumonia due to cerebral 
infarction, and bronchopneumonia due to hype rtensive heart disease. The originating 
cause of the first-mentioned sequence is selected. 

--- PAGE 34 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
28 
Example 12: I (a) Oesophageal varices and congestive heart failure 
 (b) Chronic rheumatic heart disease and cirrhosis of liver 
Select cirrhosis of liver (K74.6). The se quence terminating in the condition first 
entered on the certificate is oesophageal varices due to cirrhosis of liver. 
Example 13: I (a) Acute myocardial infarction  
 (b) Atherosclerotic heart disease 
 (c) Influenza 
Select atherosclerotic heart disease. Th e reported sequence terminating in the 
condition first entered on the certificate is acute myocardial infarction due to 
atherosclerotic heart disease. But Modification Rule C also applies; see Example 45. 
Example 14: I (a)  Pericarditis 
 (b) Uraemia and pneumonia 
Select uraemia. There are two reported se quences terminating in the condition first 
entered on the certificate: pericarditis due to uraemia and pericarditis due to 
pneumonia. The originating cause of the first-mentioned sequence is selected. But 
Modification Rule D also applies; see Example 60. 
Example 15: I (a) Cerebral infarcti on and hypostatic pneumonia 
 (b) Hypertension and diabetes 
 (c) Atherosclerosis 
Select atherosclerosis. There are two repor ted sequences terminating in the condition 
first entered on the certificate: cerebral infarction due to hypertension due to 
atherosclerosis and cerebral infarction due to diabetes. The originating cause of the 
first-mentioned sequence is selected. But Modification Rule C also applies; see 
Example 46. 
Rule 2 
If there is no reported sequence terminating in the condition first entered on the certificate, 
select this first-mentioned condition. 
Example 16: I (a) Pernicious anaemia and gangrene of foot 
 (b) Atherosclerosis 
Select pernicious anaemia (D51.0). There is no reported sequence terminating in the 
first entered condition. 
Example 17: I (a) Rheumatic and atherosclerotic heart disease  
Select rheumatic heart disease (I09.9). There is no reported sequence;  both conditions 
are on the same line. 
Example 18: I (a) Fibrocystic disease of the pancreas 
 (b) Bronchitis and bronchiectasis 
Select fibrocystic disease of the pancreas (E84.9). There is no reported sequence. 
Example 19: I (a) Senility and hypostatic pneumonia 
 (b) Rheumatoid arthritis 
Select senility. There is a reported sequence - hypostatic pneumonia due to rheumatoid 
arthritis - but it does not terminate in the condition first entered on the certificate. But 
Modification Rule A also applies; see Example 33. 
Example 20: I (a) Bursitis and ulcerative colitis 
Select bursitis. There is no reported sequence.  But Modification Rule B also applies; 
see Example 41. 

--- PAGE 35 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
29 
Example 21: I (a) Acute nephritis, scarlet fever. 
Select acute nephritis. There is no reported sequence. But Rule 3 also applies; see 
Example 28. 
Rule 3 
If the condition selected by the General Principle or by Rule l or Rule 2 is obviously a direct 
consequence of another reported condition, wheth er in Part I or Part II, select this primary 
condition. 
Assumed direct consequences of another condition 
Kaposi’s sarcoma, Burkitt’s tumour and any other malignant neoplasm of lymphoid, haematopoietic 
and related tissue, classifiable to C46.- or C81-C96,  should be considered to be a direct consequence 
of HIV disease, where this is reported. No such assumption should be made for other types of 
malignant neoplasm. 
Any infectious disease classifiable to A00-B19, B25-B49, B58-B64, B99 or J12-J18 should be 
considered to be a direct consequence of reported HIV disease. 
Certain postoperative complications (pneumonia (any type), haemorrhage, thrombophlebitis, 
embolism, thrombosis, septicaemia, cardiac arrest, re nal failure (acute), aspiration, atelectasis and 
infarction) can be considered direct consequences of an operation, unless surgery was carried out four 
weeks or more before death. 
Any pneumonia in J12-J18 should be considered an obvious consequence of conditions that impair the 
immune system. Pneumonia in J18.0 and J18.2-J18. 9 should be considered an obvious consequence of 
wasting diseases (such as malignant neoplasm and ma lnutrition) and diseases causing paralysis (such 
as cerebral haemorrhage or thrombosis), as well as serious respiratory conditions, communicable 
diseases, and serious injuries. Pneumonia in J18.0 a nd J18.2-J18.9, J69.0, a nd J69.8 should also be 
considered an obvious consequence of conditions that affect the process of swallowing. 
Any disease described or qualified as “embolic” may be assumed to be a direct consequence of venous 
thrombosis, phlebitis or thrombophlebitis, valvular heart disease, atrial fibrillation, childbirth or any 
operation. 
Any disease described as secondary should be assumed to be a direct consequence of the most 
probable primary cause entered on the certificate. 
Secondary or unspecified anaemia, malnutrition, marasmus or cachexia may be assumed to be a 
consequence of any malignant neoplasm. 
Any pyelonephritis may be assumed to be a conseque nce of urinary obstruction from conditions such 
as hyperplasia of prostate or ureteral stenosis. 
Nephritic syndrome may be assumed to be a consequen ce of any streptococcal infection (scarlet fever, 
streptococcal sore throat, etc.). 
Dehydration may be assumed to be a consequence of any intestinal infectious disease. 
An operation on a given organ should be considered a direct consequence of any surgical condition 
(such as malignant tumour or injury) of the same organ reported anywhere on the certificate. 
Example 22: I (a) Kaposi’s sarcoma 
II AIDS 
Select HIV disease resulting in Kaposi’s sarcoma (B21.0) 
Example 23: I (a) Cancer of ovary 
II HIV disease 

--- PAGE 36 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
30 
Select malignant neoplasm of ovary (C56) 
Example 24: I (a) Tuberculosis 
II HIV disease 
Select HIV disease resulting in mycobacterial infection (B20.0) 
Example 25: I (a) Cerebral toxoplasmosis and herpes zoster 
 (b) Burkitt’s lymphoma, HIV disease 
Select HIV disease resulting in multiple diseases classified elsewhere (B22.7). 
Cerebral toxoplasmosis, selected by Rule 2, can be considered a direct consequence of 
HIV disease. 
Example 26: I (a) Bronchopneumonia 
II Secondary anaemia and chronic lymphatic leukaemia 
Select chronic lymphatic leukaemia (C91.1). Bronchopneumonia, selected by the 
General Principle (see Example 10), and secondary anaemia can both be considered 
direct sequels of chronic lymphatic leukaemia. 
Example 27: I (a) Cerebral haemorrhage 
 (b) Hypertension 
 (c) Chronic pyelonephritis and prostatic obstruction 
Select prostatic obstruction (N40). Chronic pyelonephritis, selected by Rule l, can be 
considered a direct sequel of prostatic obstruction. 
Example 28: I (a) Acute nephritis, scarlet fever  
Select scarlet fever (A38). Acute nephritis, selected by Rule 2 (see Example 21), can 
be considered a direct sequel of scarlet fever. 
Example 29: I (a) Nephrectomy 
II Clear cell carcinoma of kidney 
Select clear cell carcinoma of kidney (C64). There is no doubt that the nephrectomy 
was performed for the malignant neoplasm of kidney. 
Example 30: I (a) Acute anaemia 
 (b) Haematemesis 
 (c) Bleeding of oesophageal varices 
 (d) Portal hypertension 
II Cirrhosis of liver 
Select cirrhosis of liver (K74.6). Portal hypertension, selected by the General 
Principle, can be considered a direct consequence of cirrhosis of liver. 
Example 31: I (a) Hypostatic pneumonia, cerebral 
 (b) Haemorrhage and cancer of breast 
Select cerebral haemorrhage (I61.9). Hyposta tic pneumonia, selected by Rule 2, can 
be considered a direct sequel of either of the other conditions reported; the one 
mentioned first is selected. 
Example 32: I (a) Pulmonary infarction 
II Left pneumonectomy for carcinoma of lung 3 weeks 
  ago 
Select carcinoma of lung (C34.9). 
4.1.8 Modification of the selected cause 
The selected cause of death is not necessarily the most  useful and informative condition for tabulation. 
For example, if senility or some generalized disease such as hypertension or atherosclerosis has been 
selected, this is less useful than if a manifestation or result of aging or disease had been chosen. It may 

--- PAGE 37 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
31 
sometimes be necessary to modify the selection to conf orm with the requirements of the classification, 
either for a single code for two or more causes join tly reported or for preference for a particular cause 
when reported with certain other conditions. 
The modification rules that follow are intended to improve the usefulness and precision of mortality 
data and should be applied afte r selection of the originating antecedent cause. The interrelated 
processes of selection and modification have been separated for clarity. 
Some of the modification rules require further app lication of the selection rules, which will not be 
difficult for experienced coders, but it is important to go through the process of selection, modification 
and, if necessary, reselection. 
4.1.9 The modification rules 
Rule A. Senility and other ill-defined conditions 
Where the selected cause is ill-defined and a condition classified elsewhere is reported on the 
certificate, reselect the cause of death as if the ill- defined condition had not been reported, except to 
take account of that condition if it modifies the c oding.  The following conditions are regarded as ill-
defined: I46.9 (Cardiac arrest, unspecified); I 95.9 (Hypotension, unspecified); I99 (Other and 
unspecified disorders of circulatory system); J96. 0 (Acute respiratory failure); J96.9 (Respiratory 
failure, unspecified); P28.5 (Respiratory failure of newborn); R00-R94 a nd R96-R99 (Symptoms, 
signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified).  Note that R95 (Sudden 
infant death syndrome) is not regarded as ill-defined. 
Rule B. Trivial conditions   
Where the selected cause is a trivial condition unlikel y to cause death and a more serious condition is 
reported, reselect the underlying cause as if the trivial condition had not been reported. If the death 
was the result of an adverse reaction to treatment of the trivial condition, select the adverse reaction. 
Rule C. Linkage   
Where the selected cause is linked by a provision in  the classification or in the notes for use in 
underlying cause mortality coding with one or more of  the other conditions on the certificate, code the 
combination. 
Where the linkage provision is only for the combina tion of one condition specified as due to another, 
code the combination only when the correct causal relationship is stated or can be inferred from 
application of the selection rules. 
Where a conflict in linkages occurs, link with the c ondition that would have been selected if the cause 
initially selected had not been reported. Make any further linkage that is applicable. 
Rule D. Specificity   
Where the selected cause describes a condition in gene ral terms and a term that provides more precise 
information about the site or nature of this cond ition is reported on the certificate, prefer the more 
informative term. This rule will often apply when the general term becomes an adjective, qualifying 
the more precise term. 

--- PAGE 38 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
32 
Rule E. Early and late stages of disease   
Where the selected cause is an ear ly stage of a disease and a more advanced stage of the same disease 
is reported on the certificate, code to the more adva nced stage. This rule does not apply to a “chronic” 
form reported as due to an “acute” form unless the cl assification gives special instructions to that 
effect. 
Rule F. Sequelae  
Where the selected cause is an early form of a condition for which the classification provides a 
separate “Sequelae of ...” category, and there is ev idence that death occurred from residual effects of 
this condition rather than from those of its active phase, code to the appropriate “Sequelae of ...” 
category. 
“Sequelae of ...” categories are as follows: B90-B94, E64.-, E68, G09, I69, O97 and Y85-Y89. 
4.1.10 Examples of the modification rules 
Rule A. Senility and other ill-defined conditions 
Where the selected cause is ill-defined and a condi tion classified elsewhere is reported on the 
certificate, reselect the cause of death as if the ill-defined condition had not been reported, except 
to take account of that condition if it modifi es the coding.  The following conditions are regarded 
as ill-defined: I46.9 (Cardiac arrest, unspecifi ed); I95.9 (Hypotension, unspecified); I99 (Other 
and unspecified disorders of circulatory sy stem); J96.0 (Acute respiratory failure); J96.9 
(Respiratory failure, unspecified); P28.5 (Respir atory failure of newborn); R00-R94 and R96-
R99 (Symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified).  
Note that R95 (Sudden infant death syndrome) is not regarded as ill-defined. 
Example 33: I (a) Senility and hypostatic pneumonia 
 (b) Rheumatoid arthritis 
Code to rheumatoid arthritis (M06.9). Senility, selected by Rule 2 (see Example 19), is 
ignored and the General Principle applied. 
Example 34: I (a) Anaemia 
 (b) Splenomegaly 
Code to splenomegalic anaemia (D64.8). Splenomegaly, selected by the General 
Principle, is ignored but modifies the coding. 
Example 35: I (a) Myocardial degeneration and 
 (b) emphysema 
 (c) Senility 
Code to myocardial degeneration (I51.5). Se nility, selected by the General Principle, 
is ignored and Rule 2 applied. 
Example 36: I (a) Cough and haematemesis 
Code to haematemesis (K92.0). Cough, selected by Rule 2, is ignored. 
Example 37: I (a) Terminal pneumonia 
 (b) Spreading gangrene and cerebrovascular 
 (c) infarction 
Code to cerebrovascular infarction (I63.9). Ga ngrene, selected by Rule 1, is ignored 
and the General Principle is applied. 

--- PAGE 39 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
33 
Rule B. Trivial conditions   
Where the selected cause is a trivial condition  unlikely to cause death and a more serious 
condition is reported, reselect the underlying cau se as if the trivial condition had not been 
reported. If the death was the result of an adv erse reaction to treatment of the trivial condition, 
select the adverse reaction. 
Example 38: I (a) Dental caries 
II Cardiac arrest 
Code to cardiac arrest (I46.9). Dental caries, selected by the General Principle, is 
ignored. 
Example 39: I (a) Ingrowing toenail and acute renal failure  
Code to acute renal failure (N17.9). Ingrowing toenail, selected by Rule 2, is ignored. 
Example 40: I (a) Intraoperative haemorrhage 
 (b) Tonsillectomy 
 (c) Hypertrophy of tonsils 
Code to haemorrhage during surgical operation (Y60.0). 
Example 41: I (a) Bursitis and ulcerative colitis 
Code to ulcerative colitis (K51.9). Bursitis, selected by Rule 2 (see Example 20), is 
ignored. 
Example 42: I (a) Paronychia 
II Tetanus  
Code to tetanus (A35). Paronychia, selected by the General Principle, is ignored. 
Rule C. Linkage   
Where the selected cause is linked by a provision in the classification or in the notes for use in 
underlying cause mortality coding with one or more of the other conditions on the certificate, 
code the combination. 
Where the linkage provision is only for the comb ination of one condition specified as due to 
another, code the combination only when the co rrect causal relationship is stated or can be 
inferred from application of the selection rules. 
Where a conflict in linkages occurs, link with the co ndition that would have been selected if the 
cause initially selected had not been reported. Make any further linkage that is applicable. 
Example 43: I (a) Intestinal obstruction 
 (b) Femoral hernia 
Code to femoral hernia with obstruction (K41.3). 
Example 44: I (a) Right bundle-branch block and Chagas’ disease 
Code to Chagas’ disease with heart involvement (B57.2). Right bundle-branch block, 
selected by Rule 2, links with Chagas’ disease. 
Example 45: I (a) Acute myocardial infarction 
 (b) Atherosclerotic heart disease 
 (c) Influenza 
Code to acute myocardial infarction (I21.9) . Atherosclerotic heart disease, selected by 
Rule l (see Example 13), links with acute myocardial infarction. 

--- PAGE 40 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
34 
Example 46: I (a) Cerebral infarcti on and hypostatic pneumonia 
 (b) Hypertension and diabetes 
 (c) Atherosclerosis 
Code to cerebral infarction (I63.9). Atherosclerosis, selected by Rule l (see Example 
15), links with hypertension, which itself links with cerebral infarction. 
Example 47: I (a) Cardiac dilatation and renal sclerosis 
 (b) Hypertension 
Code to hypertensive heart and renal disease (I13.9). All three conditions combine. 
Example 48: I (a) Stroke 
 (b) Atherosclerosis and hypertensive heart  
 (c) disease  
Code to hypertensive heart disease (I11.9). Atherosclerosis, selected by Rule l, links 
with hypertensive heart disease since hype rtensive heart disease would have been 
selected by the General Principle if atherosclerosis had not been reported. 
Example 49: I (a) Stroke and hypertensive 
 (b) heart disease 
 (c) Atherosclerosis 
Code to stroke (I64). Atherosclerosis, select ed by the General Principle, links with 
stroke since this condition would have been selected by Rule 2 if atherosclerosis had 
not been reported. 
Example 50: I (a) Secondary polycythaemia 
 (b) Pulmonary emphysema 
 (c) Chronic bronchitis 
Code to obstructive chronic bronchitis (J 44.8).Chronic bronchitis, selected by the 
General Principle, links with emphysema. 
Example 51: I (a) Cardiac dilatation  
 (b) Hypertension 
II Atrophy of the kidneys 
Code to hypertensive heart and renal disease I13.9. All three conditions combine. 
Example 52:  I (a) Bronchopneumonia (aspiration) 
 (b) Convulsions 
 (c) Tuberculous meningitis 
II Pulmonary tuberculosis 
Code to pulmonary tuberculosis (A16.2) . Tuberculous meningitis, selected by the 
General Principle, is not to be used with mention of pulmonary tuberculosis. 
Example 53: I (a) Occipital fracture 
 (b) Fall following epileptic convulsions 
Code to epileptic convulsions (G40.9). Fall, selected by Rule 1, links with epileptic 
convulsions. 
Example 54: I (a) Cardiac arrest 
II Chagas’ disease 
Code to Chagas’ disease with heart involvement (B57.2). Cardiac arrest, selected by 
the General Principle, links with Chagas’ disease. 

--- PAGE 41 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
35 
Rule D. Specificity   
Where the selected cause describes a condition in general terms and a term that provides more 
precise information about the site or nature of this condition is reported on the certificate, prefer 
the more informative term. This rule will ofte n apply when the general term becomes an 
adjective, qualifying the more precise term. 
Example 55: I (a) Cerebral infarction 
 (b) Cerebrovascular accident 
Code to cerebral infarction (I63.9). 
Example 56: I (a) Rheumatic heart disease, mitral stenosis 
Code to rheumatic mitral stenosis (I05.0). 
Example 57: I (a) Meningitis 
 (b) Tuberculosis  
Code to tuberculous meningitis (A17.0). The conditions are stated in the correct causal 
relationship. 
Example 58: I (a) Severe hypertension in pregnancy 
II Eclamptic convulsions 
Code to eclampsia in pregnancy (O15.0). 
Example 59: I (a) Aneurysm of aorta 
 (b) Syphilis 
Code to syphilitic aneurysm of aorta (A52.0) . The conditions are stated in the correct 
causal relationship. 
Example 60: I (a) Pericarditis 
 (b) Uraemia and pneumonia 
Code to uraemic pericarditis (N18.8). Uraemia, selected by Rule l (see Example 14), 
modifies the pericarditis. 
Rule E. Early and late stages of disease   
Where the selected cause is an early stage of a disease and a more advanced stage of the same 
disease is reported on the certificate, code to the more advanced stage. This rule does not apply 
to a “chronic” form reported as due to an “acute” form unless the classification gives special 
instructions to that effect. 
Example 61: I (a) Tertiary syphilis 
 (b) Primary syphilis 
Code to tertiary syphilis (A52.9). 
Example 62: I (a) Eclampsia during pregnancy 
 (b) Pre-eclampsia  
Code to eclampsia during pregnancy (O15.0). 
Example 63: I (a) Chronic myocarditis 
 (b) Acute myocarditis 
Code to acute myocarditis (I40.9). 
Example 64: I (a) Chronic nephritis 
 (b) Acute nephritis 
Code to chronic nephritis, unspecified (N03.9) , as special instruction is given to this 
effect. 

--- PAGE 42 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
36 
Rule F. Sequelae  
Where the selected cause is an early form of a co ndition for which the classification provides a 
separate “Sequelae of ...” category, and there is evidence that death occurred from residual 
effects of this condition rather than from tho se of its active phase, code to the appropriate 
“Sequelae of ...” category. 
“Sequelae of ...” categories are as follows:  B90-B94, E64.-, E68, G09, I69, O97 and Y85-Y89. 
Example 65: I (a) Pulmonary fibrosis 
 (b) Old pulmonary tuberculosis 
Code to sequelae of respiratory tuberculosis (B90.9). 
Example 66:  I (a) Bronchopneumonia 
 (b) Curvature of spine 
 (c) Rickets in childhood 
Code to sequelae of rickets (E64.3). 
Example 67: I (a) Hydrocephalus 
 (b) Tuberculous meningitis 
Code to sequelae of tuberculous meningitis (B90.0). 
Example 68: I (a) Hypostatic pneumonia 
 (b) Hemiplegia 
 (c) Cerebrovascular accident (l0 years) 
Code to sequelae of cerebrovascular accident (I69.4). 
Example 69: I (a) Chronic nephritis 
 (b) Scarlet fever 
Code to sequelae of other specified in fectious and parasitic diseases (B94.8). The 
description of the nephritis as chronic implies that the scarlet fever is no longer in its 
active phase. 
4.1.11 Notes for use in underlying cause mortality coding 
The following notes often indicate that if the provisi onally selected code, as indicated in the left-hand 
column, is present with one of the conditions listed be low it, the code to be used is the one shown in 
bold type. There are two types of combination: 
“with mention of” means that the other condition may appear anywhere on the certificate; 
“when reported as the originating antecedent cause of” means that the other condition must appear in a 
correct causal relationship or be otherwise indicat ed as being “due to” the originating antecedent 
cause. 
A00-B99 Certain infectious and parasitic diseases  
Except for human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease (B20-B24), when reported as 
the originating antecedent cause of a malignant neoplasm, code C00-C97. 
A15.- Respiratory tuberculosis, bacterio logically and histologically confirmed 
A16.- Respiratory tuberculosis, not confir med bacteriologically or histologically  
with mention of: 
J60-J64 (Pneumoc oniosis), code J65 
A17.- Tuberculosis of nervous system  
A18.- Tuberculosis of other organs  

--- PAGE 43 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
37 
with mention of: 
A15 or A16 (Respiratory tuberculosis), code A15, A16, unless reported as the originating 
antecedent cause of and with a specified duration exceeding that of the condition in A15.- 
or A16.-  
A39.2 Acute meningococcaemia 
A39.3 Chronic meningococcaemia 
A39.4 Meningococcaemia, unspecified 
with mention of: 
A39.0 (Meningococcal meningitis), code A39.0 
A39.1 (Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome), code A39.1 
A40.- Streptococcal septicaemia 
A41.- Other septicaemia 
A46  Erysipelas 
Code to these diseases when they follow a superficial injury (any condition in S00, S10, 
S20, S30, S40, S50, S60, S70, S80, S90, T00, T09.0, T11.0), or first-degree burn; when 
they follow a more serious injury, code to the external cause of the injury. 
B20-B24 Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease 
The subcategories at B20-B23 are the only optional four-character codes for countries 
using the four-character version of ICD-10. These four-character subcategories are 
provided for use where it is not possible or not desired to use multiple-cause coding. 
Conditions classifiable to two or more subcategories of the same category should be 
coded to the .7 subcategory of the relevant category (B20 or B21). If desired, additional 
codes from within the block B20-B24 may be used to specify the individual conditions 
listed. 
B22.7 HIV disease resulting in multiple diseases classified elsewhere 
This subcategory should be used when conditions classifiable to two or more categories 
from B20-B22 are listed on the certificate. If desired, additional codes from within the 
block B20-B24 may be used to specify the individual conditions listed. 
B95-B97 Bacterial, viral and other infectious agents 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. 
D50-D89 Diseases of the blood and blood-forming or gans and certain disorders involving the 
immune mechanism 
as the cause of: 
B20-B24 Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease and where the certificate 
indicates that the HIV disease is a result of a blood transfusion given as 
treatment for the originating condition, code B20-B24 
E86 Volume depletion 
with mention of: 
A00-A09 (Intestinal infectious diseases), code A00-A09 

--- PAGE 44 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
38 
E89.- Postprocedural endocrine and metabo lic disorders, not elsewhere classified 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. See Operations, 4.2.6. 
F01-F09 Organic, including symptomatic, mental disorders 
Not to be used if the underlying physical condition is known. 
F10-F19 Mental and behavioural disorder s due to psychoactive substance use  
Fourth characters .0 (Acute intoxication) and .5 (Psychotic disorder) with mention of 
Dependence syndrome (.2), code F10-F19 with fourth character .2 
F10.- Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol 
with mention of: 
K70.- (Alcoholic liver disease), code K70.- 
F10.2 Dependence syndrome due to use of alcohol 
with mention of: 
F10.4, F10.6, F10.7 Withdrawal state with delirium, Amnesic syndrome, Residual and 
late-onset psychotic disorder, code F10.4, F10.6, F10.7 
F17.- Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco 
when reported as the originating antecedent cause of: 
C34.- (Malignant neoplasm of  bronchus and lung), code C34.- 
I20-I25 (Ischaemic heart disease), code I20-I25 
J40-J47 (Chronic lower respiratory disease), code J40-J47 
F70-F79 Mental retardation 
Not to be used if the underlying physical condition is known  
G25.5 Other chorea 
with mention of: 
I00-I02 (Acute rheumatic fever), code I02.-  
I05-I09 (Chronic rheumatic heart disease), code I02.-  
G81.- Hemiplegia 
G82.- Paraplegia and tetraplegia 
G83.- Other paralytic syndromes 
Not to be used if the cause of the paralysis is known. 
G97.- Postprocedural disorders of nervous system, not elsewhere classified  
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. See Operations, 4.2.6. 
H54.- Blindness and low vision 
Not to be used if the antecedent condition is known. 
H59.- Postprocedural disorders of eye and adnexa, not elsewhere classified  
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. See Operations, 4.2.6. 
H90.- Conductive and sensorineural hearing loss 
H91.- Other hearing loss 
Not to be used if the antecedent condition is known. 
H95.- Postprocedural disorders of ear and mastoid process, not elsewhere classified 

--- PAGE 45 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
39 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. See Operations, 4.2.6. 
I05.8 Other mitral valve diseases 
I05.9 Mitral valve disease, unspecified 
when of unspecified cause with mention of: 
I34.- (Nonrheumatic mitral valve disorders), code I34.- 
I09.1 Rheumatic diseases of endocardium, valve unspecified 
I09.9 Rheumatic heart disease, unspecified 
with mention of: 
I05-I08 (Chronic rheumatic heart disease), code I05-I08 
I10 Essential (primary) hypertension 
with mention of: 
I11.- (Hypertensive heart disease), code I11.- 
I12.- (Hypertensive renal disease), code I12.- 
I13.- (Hypertensive heart and renal disease), code I13.- 
I20-I21 (Ischaemic heart disease), code I20-I25 
I60-I69 (Cerebrovascular disease), code I60-I69 
N00.- (Acute nephritic syndrome), code N00.-   
N01.- (Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome), code N01.- 
N03.- (Chronic nephritic syndrome), code N03.- 
N04.- (Nephrotic syndrome), code N04.- 
N05.-  (Unspecified nephritic syndrome), code N05.- 
N18.- (Chronic renal failure), code I12.- 
N19  (Unspecified renal failure), code I12.- 
N26  (Unspecified contracted kidney), code I12.- 
when reported as the originating antecedent cause of: 
H35.0 (Background retinopathy and ot her vascular changes), code H35.0 
I05-I09 (Conditions classifiable to I05-I09 but not specified as rheumatic), code 
I34-I38 
I34-I38 (Nonrheumatic valve disorders), code I34-I38 
I50.- (Heart failure), code I11.0 
I51.4- (Complications and ill-defined  
I51.9 descriptions of heart disease), code I11.- 
I11.- Hypertensive heart disease 
with mention of: 
I12.-  (Hypertensive renal disease), code I13.- 
I13.- (Hypertensive heart and renal disease), code I13.- 
I20-I25 (Ischaemic heart disease), code I20-I25 
N18.- (Chronic renal failure), code I13.- 
N19  (Unspecified renal failure), code I13.- 
N26  (Unspecified contracted kidney), code I13.- 

--- PAGE 46 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
40 
I12.- Hypertensive renal disease 
with mention of: 
I11.-  (Hypertensive heart disease), code I13.- 
I13.-  (Hypertensive heart and renal disease), code I13.- 
I20-I25 (Ischaemic heart disease), code I20-I25 
when reported as the originating antecedent cause of: 
I50.- (Heart failure), code I13.0 
I51.4- (Complications and ill-defined 
I51.9 descriptions of heart disease), code I13.- 
I13.- Hypertensive heart and renal disease 
with mention of: 
I20-I25 (Ischaemic heart disease), code I20-I25 
I15.- Secondary hypertension 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. If the cause is not stated, code to 
Other ill-defined and unspecified causes of mortality (R99). 
I20.- Angina pectoris 
I24.- Other acute ischaemic heart diseases 
I25.- Chronic ischaemic heart disease 
with mention of: 
I21.-  (Acute myocardial infarction), code I21.- 
I22.-  (Subsequent myocardial infarction), code I22.- 
I21.- Acute myocardial infarction 
with mention of: 
I22.-  (Subsequent myocardial infarction), code I22.- 
I23.- Certain current complications following acute myocardial infarction 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. Use code I21.- or I22.- as 
appropriate. 
I24.0 Coronary thrombosis not resulting in myocardial infarction 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. For mortality the occurrence of 
myocardial infarction is assumed and assignment made to I21.- or I22.- as appropriate 
I27.9 Pulmonary heart disease, unspecified 
with mention of: 
M41.-  (Scoliosis), code I27.1 
I44.- Atrioventricular and left bundle-branch block 
I45.- Other conduction disorders 
I46.- Cardiac arrest 
I47.- Paroxysmal tachycardia 
I48   Atrial fibrillation and flutter 
I49.- Other cardiac arrhythmias 
I50.- Heart failure 

--- PAGE 47 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
41 
I51.4- Complications and ill-defined descriptions of heart 
I51.9 disease  
with mention of: 
B57.- (Chagas’ disease), code B57.- 
I20-I25 (Ischaemic heart diseases), code I20-I25 
I50.- Heart failure 
I51.9 Heart disease, unspecified 
with mention of: 
M41.- (Scoliosis), code I27.1 
I50.9 Heart failure, unspecified 
I51.9 Heart disease, unspecified 
with mention of: 
J81 (Pulmonary oedema), code I50.1 
I65.- Occlusion and stenosis of precerebral arteries, not resulting in cerebral infarction 
I66.- Occlusion and stenosis of cerebral ar teries, not resulting in cerebral infarction 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. For mortality, the occurrence of 
cerebral infarction is assumed and assignment made to I63.-. 
I67.2 Cerebral atherosclerosis 
with mention of: 
I60-I64 (Cerebral haemorrhage, cerebral infarction or stroke), code I60-I64 
when reported as the originating antecedent cause of conditions in: 
F03 (Unspecified dementia), code F01.- 
G20 (Parkinson’s disease), code G20 
I70.- Atherosclerosis 
with mention of: 
I10-I13 (Hypertensive disease), code I10-I13 
I20-I25 (Ischaemic heart diseases), code I20-I25 
I51.4 (Myocarditis, unspecified), code I51.4 
I51.5 (Myocardial degeneration), code I51.5 
I51.6 (Cardiovascular disease, unspecified), code I51.6 
I51.8 (Other ill-defined heart diseases), code I51.8 
I51.9 (Heart disease, unspecified), code I51.9 
I60-I69 (Cerebrovascular diseases), code I60-I69  
when reported as the originating antecedent cause of: 
I05-I09 (Conditions classifiable to I05-I09 but not specified as rheumatic), code 
I34-I38  
I34-I38 (Nonrheumatic valve disorders), code I34-I38 
I71-I78 (Other diseases of arteries, arterioles and capillaries), code I71-I78 
K55.- (Vascular disorders of intestine), code K55.- 
N26  (Unspecified contracted kidney), code I12.-  

--- PAGE 48 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
42 
I70.9 Generalized and unspecified atherosclerosis 
with mention of: 
R02 (Gangrene, not elsewhere classified), code I70.2 
when reported as the originating antecedent cause of: 
F03 (Unspecified dementia), code F01.- 
G20 (Parkinson’s disease), code G20 
I97.- Postprocedural disorders of circulatory system, not elsewhere classified  
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. See Operations, 4.2.6. 
J00 Acute nasopharyngitis [common cold] 
J06.- Acute upper respiratory infections of multiple and unspecified sites 
when reported as the originating antecedent cause of: 
G03.8 (Meningitis), code G03.8  
G06.0 (Intracranial abscess and granuloma), code G06.0  
H65-H66 (Otitis media), code H65-H66  
H70.- (Mastoiditis and re lated conditions), code H70.-  
J10-J18 (Influenza and pneumonia), code J10-J18  
J20-J21 (Bronchitis a nd bronchiolitis), code J20-J21 
J40-J42 (Unspecified and chronic bronchitis), code J40-J42 
J44.- (Other chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), code J44.- 
N00.- (Acute nephritic syndrome), code N00.- 
J20.- Acute bronchitis 
with mention of: 
J41.- (Simple and mucopurulent chronic bronchitis), code J41.- 
J42  (Unspecified chronic bronchitis), code J42 
J44 (Other chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), code J44 
J40 Bronchitis, not specified as acute or chronic 
J41.- Simple and mucopurulent chronic bronchitis 
J42 Unspecified chronic bronchitis 
with mention of: 
J43.- (Emphysema) code J44.- 
J44.- (Other chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) code J44.- 
when reported as the originating antecedent cause of:  
J45.- (Asthma), code J44.- (but see also note at J45.-, J46, below) 
J43.- Emphysema 
with mention of: 
J40 (Bronchitis, not specified as acute or chronic), code J44.- 
J41.- (Simple and mucopurulent chronic bronchitis), code J44.- 
J42 (Unspecified chronic bronchitis), code J44.- 

--- PAGE 49 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
43 
J45.- Asthma 
J46 Status asthmaticus 
When asthma and bronchitis (acute)(chronic) or other chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease are reported together on the medical certificate of cause of death, the underlying 
cause should be selected by applying the General Principle or Rules 1, 2 or 3 in the 
normal way. Neither term should be treated as an adjectival modifier of the other. 
J60-J64 Pneumoconiosis 
with mention of: 
A15-A16 (Respiratory tuberculosis), code J65 
J81 Pulmonary oedema 
with mention of: 
I50.9 (Heart failure, unspecified), code I50.1 
I51.9 (Heart disease, unspecified), code I50.1 
J95.- Postprocedural respiratory disorders, not elsewhere classified 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. See Operations, 4.2.6. 
K91.- Postprocedural disorders of dig estive system, not elsewhere classified 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. See Operations, 4.2.6. 
M41.- Scoliosis 
with mention of: 
I27.9 (Pulmonary heart disease, unspecified), code I27.1 
I50.- (Heart failure), code I27.1 
I51.9 (Heart disease, unspecified), code I27.1 
M96.- Postprocedural musculoskeletal disorders, not elsewhere classified 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. See Operations, 4.2.6. 

--- PAGE 50 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
44 
N00.- Acute nephritic syndrome 
when reported as the originating antecedent cause of: 
N03.- (Chronic nephritic syndrome), code N03.- 
N18.- Chronic renal failure 
N19 Unspecified renal failure 
N26 Unspecified contracted kidney 
with mention of: 
I10  (Essential (primary) hypertension), code I12.- 
I11.- (Hypertensive heart disease), code I13.- 
I12.- (Hypertensive renal disease), code I12.- 
N46 Male infertility 
N97.- Female infertility 
Not to be used if the causative condition is known. 
N99.- Postprocedural disorders of genitourinary system, not elsewhere classified 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. See Operations, 4.2.6. 
O08.- Complications following aborti on and ectopic and molar pregnancy 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. Use categories O00-O07. 
O30.- Multiple gestation 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding if a more specific complication is 
reported. 
O32.- Maternal care for known or suspected malpresentation of fetus 
with mention of : 
O33.- (Maternal care for known or suspected disproportion), code O33.- 
O33.9 Fetopelvic disproportion 
with mention of: 
O33.0-O33.3 (Disproportion due to abnormality of maternal pelvis), code 
O33.0-O33.3 
O64.- Obstructed labour due to malposition and malpresentation of fetus 
with mention of: 
O65.- (Obstructed labour due to ma ternal pelvic abnormality), code O65.- 
O80-O84 Method of delivery 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. If no other cause of maternal 
mortality is reported, code to Complication of labour and delivery, unspecified (O75.9) 
P07.- Disorders related to short gestation a nd low birth weight, not elsewhere classified 
P08.- Disorders related to long gestation and high birth weight 
Not to be used if any other cause of perinatal mortality is reported. 

--- PAGE 51 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
45 
R69.- Unknown and unspecified causes of morbidity  
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. Use R95-R99 as appropriate. 
S00-T98 Injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding except as an additional code to the 
relevant category in V01-Y89 
S02.- Fracture of skull and facial bones 
When more than one site is mentioned, code to multiple fractures involving skull and 
facial bones, S02.7 
S06.- Intracranial injury 
When a fracture of the skull or facial bones is associated with an intracranial injury, 
priority should be given to the fracture. 
with mention of: 
S02.- (Fracture of skull or facial bones), code S02.- 
T36-T50 Poisoning by drugs, medicaments and bi ological substances (accidental poisoning and 
poisoning of undetermined intent by alcohol or dependence-producing drugs) 
with mention of: 
F10-F19 with fourth character .2 (alcohol dependence or drug dependence), code 
F10-F19 with fourth character .2 
T79.- Certain early complications of trauma, not elsewhere classified 
Not to be used if the nature of the antecedent injury is known. 
V01-X59 Accidents 
with mention of: 
A35 (Tetanus), code A35 
resulting from: 
G40-G41 (Epilepsy), code G40-G41 
X40-X49 Accidental poisoning by and exposure to noxious substances 
Y10-Y15 Poisoning by and exposur e to noxious substances, undetermined intent (poisoning by 
alcohol or dependence-producing drugs) 
with mention of: 
F10-F19 with fourth character .2 (alcohol dependence or drug dependence) code, 
F10-F19 with fourth character .2 
Y90-Y98 Supplementary factors related to causes of  morbidity and mortality classified elsewhere 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. 
Z00-Z99 Factors influencing health status and contact with health services 
Not to be used for underlying cause mortality coding. 

--- PAGE 52 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
46 
4.1.12 Summary of linkages by code number 
When the selected cause is listed in the first column of Table 1, and one or more of the causes listed in 
the second column have been entered anywhere on th e certificate, code as indicated in the fourth 
column. 
When the selected cause is listed in  the first column and appears on the certificate as a cause of one of 
the diseases listed in the third column, code as indicated in the fourth column. 
Table 1. Summary of linkages by code number 
Selected cause With mention of: As cause of: Resulting linked 
code 
  
A00-B19 }    
B25-B99 }  C00-C97 C00-C97
A15.-, A16.- J60-J64  J65
A17.-, A18.- A15.-, A16.- A15.-, A16.-
A39.2-A39.4 A39.0, A39.1  A39.0, A39.1
D50-D59 B20-B24  B20-B24 
E86 A00-A09  A00-A09
F10-F19 (F1x.0) } F10-F19 (F1x.2)   F10-F19 (F1x.2)
 (F1x.5) }    
F10 K70.-  K70.-
F10.2 F10.4, F10.6,  F10.4, F10.6,
 F10.7  F10.7 
F17.-  C34.- C34.-
  I20-I25 I20-I25
  J40-J47 J40-J47
G25.5 I00-I02  I02.-
 I05-I09  I02.-
I05.8 }     
I05.9 }     
(of unspecified }     
cause) }  I34.-  I34.-
I09.1 }     
I09.9 }  I05-I08  I05-I08
I10 I11.-  I11.-
 I12.-  I12.-
 I13.-  I13.-
 I20-I25  I20-I25
 I60-I69  I60-I69
 
N00.-  N00.-
 N01.-  N01.-
 N03-N05  N03-N05
 N18.-  I12.-
 N19  I12.-
 N26  I12.-
  H35.0 H35.0
  I05-I09  
  (not specified as  
  rheumatic) I34-I38
  I34-I38 I34-I38
  I50.- I11.0
  I51.4-I51.9 I11.-

--- PAGE 53 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
47 
Selected cause With mention of: As cause of: Resulting linked 
code 
  
I11.- I12.-  I13.-
 I13.-  I13.-
 I20-I25  I20-I25
 N18.-  I13.-
 N19  I13.-
 N26  I13.-
I12.- I11.-  I13.-
 I13.-  I13.-
 I20-I25  I20-I25
  I50.- I13.0
  I51.4-I51.9 I13.-
I13.- I20-I25  I20-I25
I20.- }     
I24.- }  I21.-  I21.-
I25.- }  I22.-  I22.-
I21.- I22.-  I22.-
I27.9 M41.-  I27.1
I44-I50 }  B57.-  B57.-
I51.4-I51.9 }  I20-I25  I20-I25
I50.- }     
I51.9 }  M41.-  I27.1
I50.9 }     
I51.9 }  J81  I50.1
I67.2 I60-I64  I60-I64
  F03 F01.-
  G20 G20
I70.- I10-I13  I10-I13
 I20-I25  I20-I25
 I51.4  I51.4
 I51.5  I51.5
 I51.6  I51.6
 I51.8  I51.8
 I51.9  I51.9
 I60-I69  I60-I69
  I05-I09  
  (not speficied as  
  rheumatic) I34-I38
  I34-I38 I34-I38
  I71-I78 I71-I78
  K55.- K55.-
  N26 I12.-
I70.9 R02 I70.2
  F03 F01.-
  G20 G20
J00 }     
J06.- }   G03.8 G03.8
  G06.0 G06.0
  H65-H66 H65-H66
  H70.- H70.-
  J10-J18 J10-J18
  J20-J21 J20-J21
  J40-J42 J40-J42
  J44.- J44.-
  N00.- N00.-
J20.- J41.-  J41.-
 J42  J42
 J44.-  J44.-

--- PAGE 54 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
48 
Selected cause With mention of: As cause of: Resulting linked 
code 
  
J40 }     
J41.- }  J43.-  J44.-
J42 }  J44.-  J44.-
  J45.- J44.-
J43.- J40  J44.-
 J41.-  J44.-
 J42  J44.-
J60-J64 A15.-  J65
 A16.-  J65
J81 I50.9  I50.1
 I51.9  I50.1
M41.- I27.9  I27.1
 I50.-  I27.1
 I51.9  I27.1
N00.-  N03.- N03.-
N18.- }     
N19 }     
N26 }  I10  I12.-
 I11.-  I13.-
 I12.-  I12.-
O32.- O33.-  O33.-
O33.9 O33.0-O33.3  O33.0-O33.3
O64.- O65.-  O65.-
S06.- S02.-  S02.-
T36-T50 F10-F19 (F1x.2)  F10-F19 (F1x.2)
V01-X59 A35 A35
X40-X49 }     
Y10-Y15 }  F10-F19 (F1x.2)  F10-F19 (F1x.2)
 
Table 2. Summary of codes not to be used in underlying cause mortality coding a 
Codes not to be used for underlying cause 
mortality coding (code to item in parentheses; 
if no code is indicated, code to R99) 
Not to be used if the 
underlying cause is know
n
B95-B97  F01-F09
E89.-  F70-F79 
G97.-  G81.- 
H59.-  G82.- 
H95.-  G83.- 
I15.-  H54.- 
I23.- (code to I21 or I22) H90-H91 
I24.0 (code to I21 or I22) N46 
I65.- (code to I63) N97.- 
I66.- (code to I63) O30.- 
I97.-  P07.- 
J95.-  P08.- 
K91.-  T79.- 
M96.-   
N99.-   
O08.-   
O80-O84 (code to O75.9)  
R69.- (code to R95-R99)  
S00-T98 (code to V01-Y89)  
Y90-Y98   
Z00-Z99   
a  In addition to asterisk codes (see section 3.1.3)

--- PAGE 55 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
49 
4.2 Notes for interpretation of entries of causes of death 
The foregoing rules will usually determine the unde rlying cause of death to be used for primary 
mortality tabulation. Each country will need to amplify the rules, depending upon the completeness 
and quality of medical certification. The informati on in this section will help in formulating such 
additional instructions. 
4.2.1 Assumption of intervening cause 
Frequently on the medical certificate, one condition is indicated as due to another, but the first one is 
not a direct consequence of the second one. For ex ample, haematemesis may be stated as due to 
cirrhosis of the liver, instead of being repor ted as the final event of the sequence, liver 
cirrhosis→portal hypertension→ruptured oesophageal varices→haematemesis. 
The assumption of an intervening cause in Part I is permissible in accepting a sequence as reported, 
but it must not be used to modify the coding. 
Example 1: I (a) Cerebral haemorrhage 
 (b) Chronic nephritis 
Code to chronic nephritis (N03.9). It is necessary to assume hypertension as a 
condition intervening between cerebral haemorrhage and the underlying cause, 
chronic nephritis. 
Example 2: I (a) Mental retardation 
 (b) Premature separation of placenta 
Code to premature separation of placenta a ffecting fetus or newborn (P02.1). It is 
necessary to assume birth trauma, anoxia or hypoxia as a condition intervening 
between mental retardation and the underlying cause, premature separation of 
placenta. 
4.2.2 Interpretation of “highly improbable” 
The expression “highly improbable” has been used sin ce the Sixth Revision of the ICD to indicate an 
unacceptable causal relationship. As a guide to the acceptability of sequences in the application of the 
General Principle and the selection rules, the follo wing relationships should be regarded as “highly 
improbable”: 
(a) any infectious disease may be accepted as “due to” disorders of the immune mechanism such 
as human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease or AIDS; 
(b) an infectious or parasitic disease (A00-B99)  reported as “due to” any disease outside this 
chapter, except that:   
• diarrhoea and gastroenteritis of  ) 
 presumed infectious origin (A09) ) 
• septicaemia (A40-A41)  )  may be accepted 
• erysipelas (A46)   )  as “due to” any 
• gas gangrene (A48.0)  )  disease 
• Vincent’s angina (A69.1)  )   
• mycoses (B35-B49)   ) 
• any infectious disease may be accepted as “due to” immunosuppression by chemicals 
(chemotherapy) and radiation. Any infecti ous disease classified to A00-B19 or B25-B64 
reported as “due to” a malignant neoplasm will also be an acceptable sequence. 
• varicella and zoster infections (B01-B02) may be accepted as “due to” diabetes, 
tuberculosis and lymphoproliferative neoplasms; 
(c) a malignant neoplasm reported as “due to” any other disease, except human 
immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease; 
(d) haemophilia (D66, D67, D68.0-D68.2)  reported as “due to” any other disease; 
(e) diabetes (E10-E14) reported as “due to” any other disease except: 
• haemochromatosis (E83.1), 
• diseases of pancreas (K85-K86), 

--- PAGE 56 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
50 
• pancreatic neoplasms (C25.-, D13.6, D13.7, D37.7), 
• malnutrition (E40-E46); 
(f) rheumatic fever (I00-I02) or rheumatic heart disease (I05-I09) reported as “due to” any disease 
other than scarlet fever (A38), streptococcal sep ticaemia (A40),  streptococcal sore throat 
(J02.0) and acute tonsillitis (J03.-); 
(g) any hypertensive condition reported as “due to” any neoplasm except: 
• endocrine neoplasms, 
• renal neoplasms, 
• carcinoid tumours; 
(h) chronic ischaemic heart disease (I20, I25) reported as “due to” any neoplasm; 
(i) any cerebrovascular disease (I60-I69) reported as “due to” a disease of the digestive system 
(K00-K92) or endocarditis (I05-I08, I09.1, I 33-I38), except for cerebral embolism in I65-I66 
or intracranial haemorrhage (I60-I62);  
 (j) any condition described as arteriosclerotic  [atherosclerotic] reported as “due to” any 
neoplasm; 
(k) influenza (J10-J11) reported as “due to” any other disease; 
(l) a congenital anomaly (Q00-Q99) reported as “due to” any other disease of the individual, 
including immaturity; 
(m) a condition of stated date of onset “X” reporte d as “due to” a condition of stated date of onset 
“Y”, when “X” predates “Y” (but see also Example 5 in section 4.1.6); 
(n) accidents (V01-X59) reported as due to any other cause outside this chapter except: 
(1) any accident (V01-X59) reporte d as due to epilepsy (G40-G41), 
(2) a fall (W00-W19) due to a disorder of bone density (M80-M85), 
(3) a fall (W00-W19) due to a (pathological) fracture caused by a disorder of bone density, 
(4) asphyxia reported as due to aspiration of mucus, blood (W80) or vomitus (W78) as a 
result of disease conditions, 
(5) aspiration of food (liquid or solid) of any kind (W79) reported as due to a disease which 
affects the ability to swallow; 
(o) suicide (X60-X84) reported as due to any other cause. 
The above list does not cover all “highly impr obable” sequences, but in other cases the General 
Principle should be followed unless otherwise indicated. 
Acute or terminal circulatory diseases reported as due to malignant neoplasm, diabetes or asthma 
should be accepted as possible sequences in Part I of the certificate. The following conditions are 
regarded as acute or terminal circulatory diseases: 
I21-I22 Acute myocardial infarction 
I24.- Other acute ischaemic heart diseases 
I26.- Pulmonary embolism 
I30.- Acute pericarditis 
I33.- Acute and subacute endocarditis 
I40.- Acute myocarditis 
I44.-  Atrioventricular and left bundle-branch block 
I45.- Other conduction disorders 
I46.- Cardiac arrest 
I47.- Paroxysmal tachycardia 
I48 Atrial fibrillation and flutter 
I49.- Other cardiac arrhythmias 
I50.- Heart failure 
I51.8 Other ill-defined heart diseases 
I60-I68 Cerebrovascular diseases except I67.0-I67.5 and I67.9 
4.2.3 Effect of duration on classification 
In evaluating the reported sequence of the direct a nd antecedent causes, the inte rval between the onset 
of the disease or condition and time of death must be considered. This would apply in the 
interpretation of “highly improbable” relationships (see above) and in Modification Rule F (sequelae). 
Categories O95 (Obstetric death of unspecified cause), O96 (Death from any obstetric cause occurring 
more than 42 days but less than one year after delivery) and O97 (Death from sequelae of direct 

--- PAGE 57 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
51 
obstetric causes) classify obstetric deaths according to the time elapsed between the obstetric event 
and the death of the woman. Category O95 is to be used when a woman dies during pregnancy, labour, 
delivery, or the puerperium and the only information provided is “maternal” or “obstetric” death. If the 
obstetric cause of death is specified, code to the a ppropriate category. Category O96 is used to classify 
deaths from direct or indirect obstetric causes that occur more than 42 days but less than a year after 
termination of the pregnancy. Category O97 is used  to classify deaths from any direct obstetric cause 
which occur one year or more after termination of the pregnancy. 
Conditions classified as congenital malformations , deformations and chromosomal abnormalities 
(Q00-Q99), even when not specified as congenital on the medical certificate, should be coded as such 
if the interval between onset and death and the ag e of the decedent indicate that the condition existed 
from birth. 
The classification has specific categories for indi cating certain diseases and injuries as the cause of 
sequelae or late effects. In many cases, these sequelae include conditions present one year or more 
after the onset of the disease or injury (see also Sequelae below). 
4.2.4 Sequelae 
Certain categories (B90-B94, E64.-, E68, G09, I69. -, O97 and Y85-Y89) are to be used for underlying 
cause mortality coding to indicate that death resulted from the late (residual) effects of a given disease 
or injury rather than during the active phase. M odification Rule F applies in such circumstances. 
Conditions reported as sequelae or residual effects of  a given disease or injury should be classified to 
the appropriate sequela category, irrespective of the interval between the onset of the disease or injury 
and death. For certain conditions, deaths occurring one  year or more after the onset of the disease or 
injury are assumed to be due to a sequela or residua l effect of the condition, even though no sequela is 
explicitly mentioned. Guidance in interpreting seque lae is given under most of the “Sequelae of ...” 
categories in the tabular list. 
B90.-  Sequelae of tuberculosis 
The sequelae include conditions specified as such or  as late effects of past tuberculous disease, and 
residuals of tuberculosis specified as arrested, cure d, healed, inactive, old, or quiescent, unless there is 
evidence of active tuberculosis. 
B94.0  Sequelae of trachoma 
The sequelae include residuals of trachoma specifi ed as healed or inactive and certain specified 
sequelae such as blindness, cicatricial entropion a nd conjunctival scars, unless there is evidence of 
active infection. 
B94.1  Sequelae of viral encephalitis  
The sequelae include conditions specified as such, or  as late effects, and those present one year or 
more after onset of the causal condition. 

--- PAGE 58 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
52 
B94.8  Sequelae of other infectious and parasitic diseases  
The sequelae include conditions specified as such or as late effects and residuals of these diseases 
described as arrested, cured, h ealed, inactive, old or quiescent, unless there is evidence of active 
disease. Sequelae also include chronic conditions reported as due to, or residual conditions present one 
year or more after onset of, conditions classifiable to categories A00-B89. 
E64.3  Sequelae of rickets 
The sequelae include any condition specified as rachitic or due to rickets and present one year or more 
after onset, or stated to be a sequela or late effect of rickets. 
G09 Sequelae of inflammatory diseases of central nervous system 
This category is provided for the coding of sequel ae of conditions classifiable to G00.-, G03-G04, 
G06.- and G08. Sequelae of inflammatory diseases of the central nervous system subject to dual 
classification (G01
*-G02*, G05.-* and G07*) should be coded to the categories designated for sequelae 
of the underlying condition (e.g. B90.0 Sequelae of centr al nervous system tuberculosis). If there is no 
sequelae category for the underlying condition, code to the underlying condition itself. 
4.2.5 Consistency between sex of patient and diagnosis 
Certain categories are limited to one sex (see section 3.1.5). If, after verification, the sex and cause of 
death on the certificate are not consistent, the d eath should be coded to “Other ill-defined and 
unspecified causes of mortality” (R99). 
4.2.6 Operations 
If an operation appears on the certificate as the cause of death without mention of the condition for 
which it was performed or of the findings at opera tion, and the alphabetical index does not provide a 
specific code for the operation, code to the residua l category for the organ or site indicated by the 
name of the operation (e.g. code “nephrectomy” to  N28.9). If the operation does not indicate an organ 
or site, e.g. “laparotomy”, code to “Other ill- defined and unspecified causes of mortality” (R99), 
unless there is a mention of a therapeutic misadventure classifiable to Y60-Y84 or a postoperative 
complication. 
4.2.7 Malignant neoplasms 
When a malignant neoplasm is considered to be the underlying cause of death, it is most important to 
determine the primary site. Morphology and behaviour should also be taken into consideration. Cancer 
is a generic term and may be used for any mo rphological group, although it is rarely applied to 
malignant neoplasms of lymphatic, haematopoietic a nd related tissues. Carcinoma is sometimes used 
incorrectly as a synonym for cancer. Some death certificates may be ambiguous if there was doubt 
about the site of the primary or imprecision in drafting the certificate. In these circumstances, if 
possible, the certifier should be asked to give cl arification. Failing this, the guidelines given below 
should be observed. 
The morphological types of tumours classified in Volume 1 can be found in the Alphabetical Index 
with their morphology code and with an indication as to the coding by site. 

--- PAGE 59 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
53 
A. Implication of malignancy 
Mention on the certificate that a neoplasm has pr oduced metastases (secondaries) means that it must 
be coded as malignant, even though this neoplasm without mention of metastases would be classified 
to some other section of Chapter II. 
Example 1: I (a) Metastatic involvement of lymph nodes 
 (b) Carcinoma in situ of breast 
Code to malignant neoplasm of breast (C50.9). 
B. Sites with prefixes or imprecise definitions 
Neoplasms of sites prefixed by “peri”, “para”, “pre”, “supra”, “infra”, etc. or described as in the “area” 
or “region” of a site, unless these terms are speci fically indexed, should be coded as follows: for 
morphological types classifiable to one of the cate gories C40, C41 (bone and articular cartilage), C43 
(malignant melanoma of skin), C44 (other malignant neoplasms of skin), C45 (mesothelioma), C47 
(peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system), C49 (connective and soft tissue), C70 (meninges), 
C71 (brain) and C72 (other parts of central nervous  system), code to the appropriate subdivision of 
that category; otherwise code to the appropriate subdivision of C76 (other and ill-defined sites). 
Example 2: I (a) Fibrosarcoma in the region of the leg 
Code to malignant neoplasm of connective and soft tissue of lower limb (C49.2). 
C. Malignant neoplasms of unspecified site with other reported conditions 
When the site of a primary malignant neoplasm is  not specified, no assumption of the site should be 
made from the location of other reported conditions such as perforation, obstruction, or haemorrhage. 
These conditions may arise in sites unrelated to the neoplasm, e.g. intestinal obstruction may be 
caused by the spread of an ovarian malignancy. 
Example 3: I (a) Obstruction of intestine 
 (b) Carcinoma 
Code to malignant neoplasm without specification of site (C80). 
D. Malignant neoplasms with primary site indicated 
If a particular site is indicated as primary, it should be selected, regardless of the position on the 
certificate or whether in Part I or Part II. If the pr imary site is stated to be unknown, see E below. The 
primary site may be indicated in one of the following ways: 
(a) The specification of one site as primary in either Part I or II. 
Example 4: I (a) Carcinoma of bladder 
II  Primary in kidney 
Code to malignant neoplasm of kidney (C64). 
(b) The specification of other sites as “secondary ”, “metastases”, “spread” or “carcinomatosis”. 
Example 5: I (a) Carcinoma of breast 
 (b) Secondaries in brain 
Code to malignant neoplasm of breast (C50.9), since Rule 2 applies 

--- PAGE 60 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
54 
 (c) Morphology indicates a primary malignant neoplasm. 
If a morphological type implies a primary site, su ch as hepatoma, consider this as if the word 
“primary” had been included. 
Example 6: I (a) Metastatic carcinoma 
 (b) Pseudomucinous adenocarcinoma 
Code to malignant neoplasm of ovary (C56), since pseudomucinous 
adenocarcinoma of unspecified site is assigned to the ovary in the Alphabetical 
Index. 
If two or more primary sites or morphologies are indicated, these should be coded according to 
sections F, G and H, below. 
E. Primary site unknown 
If the statement, “primary site unknown”, or its equi valent, appears anywhere on a certificate, code to 
the category for unspecified site for the morphological type involved (e.g. adenocarcinoma C80, 
fibrosarcoma C49.9, osteosarcoma C41.9), rega rdless of the site(s) mentioned elsewhere on the 
certificate. 
Example 7: I (a) Secondary carcinoma of liver 
 (b) Primary site unknown 
 (c) ? Stomach ? Colon 
Code to carcinoma without specification of site (C80). 
Example 8: I (a) Generalized metastases 
 (b) Melanoma of back 
 (c) Primary site unknown 
Code to malignant melanoma of unspecified site (C43.9). 
F. Independent (primary) multiple sites (C97) 
The presence of more than one primary neoplasm could be indicated by mention of two different 
anatomical sites or two distinct morphological ty pes (e.g. hypernephroma and intraductal carcinoma), 
or by a mix of a morphological type that implies a specific site, plus a second site. It is highly 
improbable that one primary would be due to a nother primary malignant neoplasm except for the 
group of malignant neoplasms of lymphoid, haemat opoietic and related tissue (C81-C96), within 
which one form of malignancy may terminate in  another (e.g. leukaemia may follow non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma). 
If two or more sites mentioned in Part I are in the same organ system, see section H. If the sites are not 
in the same organ system and there is no indication that any is primary or secondary, code to 
malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites (C97), unless all are classifiable to C81-
C96, or one of the sites mentioned is a common site of metastases or the lung (see G below). 
Example 9: I (a) Cancer of stomach 
 (b) Cancer of breast 
Code to malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites (C97), since two 
different anatomical sites are mentioned and it is unlikely that one primary malignant 
neoplasm would be due to another. 
Example 10: I (a) Hodgkin’s disease 
 (b) Carcinoma of bladder 
Code to malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites (C97), since two 
distinct morphological types are mentioned. 

--- PAGE 61 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
55 
Example 11: I (a) Acute lymphocytic leukaemia 
 (b) Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma 
Code to non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (C85.9), since both are classifiable to C81-C96 and 
the sequence is acceptable. 
Example 12: I (a) Leukaemia 
 (b) Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma 
 (c) Carcinoma of ovary 
Code to malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites (C97), since, 
although two of the neoplasms are classifiable to C81-C96, there is mention of a site 
elsewhere. 
Example 13: I (a) Leukaemia 
II Carcinoma of breast 
Code to leukaemia (C95.9) because the carcinoma of breast is in Part II. When dealing 
with multiple sites, only sites in Part I of the certificate should be considered (see H). 
G. Metastatic neoplasms 
When a malignant neoplasm spreads or metastasi zes it generally retains the same morphology even 
though it may become less differentiated. Some me tastases have such a characteristic microscopic 
appearance that the pathologist can infer the primary site with confidence, e.g. thyroid. Widespread 
metastasis of a carcinoma is often called carcinomatosis.If an unqualified nonspecific term such as 
carcinoma or sarcoma appears with a term describing a more specific histology of the same broad 
group, code to the site of the more specific morphology, assuming the other to be metastatic. 
Although malignant cells can metastasize anywhere in the body, certain sites are more common than 
others and must be treated differently (see below) . However, if one of these sites appears alone on a 
death certificate and is not qualified by the word “metastatic”, it should be considered primary. 
 
Common sites of metastases 
Bone    Mediastinum 
Brain    Meninges 
Diaphragm   Peritoneum 
Heart    Pleura 
Liver    Retroperitoneum 
Lung    Spinal cord 
Lymph nodes  
Ill-defined sites (sites classifiable to C76) 
• The lung poses special problems in that it is a common site for both metastases and primary 
malignant neoplasms. Lung should be considered as a common site of metastases whenever it 
appears with sites not on this list. However,  when the bronchus or bronchogenic cancer is 
mentioned this neoplasm should be considered pr imary. If lung is mentioned and the only other 
sites are on the list of common sites of metastases, consider lung primary. 
• Malignant neoplasm of lymph nodes not specified as primary should be assumed to be secondary. 
 
 
Example 14: I (a) Cancer of brain 
 Code to malignant neoplasm of brain (C71.9). 
Example 15: I (a) Cancer of bone 
 (b) Metastatic carcinoma of lung 
Code to malignant neoplasm of lung (C34.9), since bone is on the list of common sites 
of metastases and lung can therefore be assumed to be primary. 

--- PAGE 62 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
56 
The adjective “metastatic” is used in two wa ys - sometimes meaning a secondary from a primary 
elsewhere and sometimes denoting a primary that has given rise to metastases. In order to avoid 
confusion, the following guidelines are proposed: 
(a) Malignant neoplasm described as “metas tatic from” a specified site should be 
interpreted as primary of that site. 
Example 16: I (a) Metastatic teratoma from ovary 
Code to malignant neoplasm of ovary (C56). 
(b) Malignant neoplasm described as “metasta tic to” a site should be interpreted as 
secondary of that site unless the morphology indicates a specific primary site. 
Example 17: I (a) Metastatic carcinoma to the rectum 
Code to secondary malignant neoplasm of rectum (C78.5). The word “to” 
clearly indicates rectum as secondary. 
Example 18: I (a) Metastatic osteosarcoma to brain 
Code to malignant neoplasm of bone (C41.9) , since this is the unspecified site 
of osteosarcoma. 
(c) A single malignant neoplasm  described as “metastatic (of)”. 
The terms “metastatic” and “metastatic of” should be interpreted as follows: 
(i) If one site is mentioned and this is qualifie d as metastatic, code to malignant primary of 
that particular site if no morphological type is mentioned and it is not a common 
metastatic site (see list of common sites of metastases given above). 
Example 19: I (a) Cervical cancer, metastatic 
Code to malignant neoplasm of cervix (C53.9). 
(ii) If no site is reported but the morphological  type is qualified as metastatic, code as for 
primary site unspecified of the particular morphological type involved. 
Example 20: I (a) Metastatic oat cell carcinoma 
Code to malignant neoplasm of lung (C34.9). 
(iii) If a single morphological type and a site, other than a common metastatic site (see list 
given above), are mentioned as metastatic, code to the specific category for the 
morphological type and site involved. 
Example 21: I (a) Metastatic melanoma of arm 
Code to malignant melanoma of skin of arm (C43.6), since in this case 
the ill-defined site of arm is a specific site for melanoma, not a common 
site of metastases classifiable to C76. 
(iv) If a single morphological type is mentioned as metastatic and the site mentioned is one 
of the common sites of metastases except lung,  code to “unspecified site” for the 
morphological type, unless the unspecified site is classified to C80 (malignant neoplasm 
without specification of site), in which case code to secondary malignant neoplasm of 
the site mentioned. 
Example 22: I (a) Metastatic osteosarcoma of brain 
Code to malignant neoplasm of bone, unspecified (C41.9), since brain is 
on the list of common sites of metastases. 

--- PAGE 63 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
57 
(v) If one of the common sites of metastases, ex cept lung, is described as metastatic and no 
other site or morphology is mentioned, c ode to secondary neoplasm of the site (C77-
C79). 
Example 23: I (a) Metastatic brain cancer 
Code to secondary malignant neoplasm of brain (C79.3). 
Example 24: I (a) Metastatic carcinoma of lung 
Code to malignant neoplasm of lung (C34.9). 
(d) More than one malignant neoplasm qualified as metastatic. 
(i) If two or more sites with the same morphology, not on the list of common sites of 
metastases, are reported and all are qualified as “metastatic”, code as for primary site 
unspecified of the anatomical system and of the morphological type involved. 
Example 25: I (a) Metastatic carcinoma of prostate 
 (b) Metastatic carcinoma of skin 
Code to malignant neoplasm without specification of site (C80), since 
metastatic carcinoma of prostate is not likely to be due to metastatic 
carcinoma of skin; both are probably due to spread from a malignant 
neoplasm of unknown primary site, wh ich should have been entered on 
line (c). 
Example 26: I (a) Metastatic carcinoma of stomach 
 (b) Metastatic carcinoma of breast 
 (c) Metastatic carcinoma of lung 
Code to malignant neoplasm without specification of site (C80), since 
breast and stomach do not belong to the same anatomical system and 
lung is on the list of common sites of metastases. 
(ii) If two or more morphological types of different histological groups are qualified as 
metastatic, code to malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites (C97) 
(see F). 
Example 27: I (a) Bowel obstruction 
 (b) Metastatic adenocarcinoma of bowel 
 (c) Metastatic sarcoma of uterus 
Code to malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites 
(C97). 
(iii) If a morphology implying site and an inde pendent anatomical site are both qualified as 
metastatic, code to malignant neoplasm without specification of site (C80). 
Example 28: I (a) Metastatic colonic and renal cell   carcinoma 
Code to malignant neoplasm without specification of site (C80). 

--- PAGE 64 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
58 
 
 (iv) If more than one site with the same morphology is mentioned and all but one are 
qualified as metastatic or appear on the list of common sites of metastases, code to the 
site that is not qualified as metastatic, irresp ective of the order of entry or whether it is 
in Part I or Part II. If all sites are qualified as metastatic or on the list of common sites of 
metastases, including lung, code to malignant neoplasm without specification of site 
(C80). 
Example 29: I (a) Metastatic carcinoma of stomach 
 (b) Carcinoma of gallbladder 
 (c) Metastatic carcinoma of colon 
Code to malignant neoplasm of gallbladder (C23). 
Example 30: I (a) Metastatic carcinoma of ovary 
(b) Carcinoma of lung 
(c) Metastatic cervical carcinoma 
Code to malignant neoplasm without specification of site (C80). 
Example 31: I (a) Metastatic carcinoma of stomach 
 (b) Metastatic carcinoma of lung 
II Carcinoma of colon 
Code to malignant neoplasm of colon (C18.9), since this is the only 
diagnosis not qualified as metastatic, even though it is in Part II. 
(v) If all sites mentioned are on the list of common sites of metastases, code to unknown 
primary site of the morphological type i nvolved, unless lung is mentioned, in which 
case code to malignant neoplasm of lung (C34.). 
Example 32: I (a) Cancer of liver 
 (b) Cancer of abdomen 
Code to malignant neoplasm without specification of site (C80), since 
both are on the list of common sites of metastases. (Abdomen is one of 
the ill-defined sites included in C76.-.) 
Example 33: I (a) Cancer of brain 
 (b) Cancer of lung 
Code to cancer of lung (C34.9), since lung in this case is considered to 
be primary, because brain, the only other site mentioned, is on the list of 
common sites of metastases. 
(vi) If only one of the sites mentioned is on the list of common sites of metastases or lung, 
code to the site not on the list. 
Example 34: I (a) Cancer of lung 
 (b) Cancer of breast 
Code to malignant neoplasm of breast (C50.9), since lung in this case is 
considered to be a metastatic site, because breast is not on the list of 
common sites of metastases. 

--- PAGE 65 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
59 
 
 (vii) If one or more of the sites mentioned is a common site of metastases (see list given 
above) but two or more sites or different mo rphological types are also mentioned, code 
to malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites (C97) (see F above). 
Example 35: I (a) Cancer of liver 
 (b) Cancer of bladder 
 (c) Cancer of colon 
Code to malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites 
(C97), since liver is on the list of common sites of metastases and there 
are still two other independent sites. 
(viii) If there is a mixture of several sites qualified as metastatic and several other sites are 
mentioned, refer to the rules for multiple sites (see F above and H below). 
H. Multiple sites 
When dealing with multiple sites, only sites in Part I of the certificate should be considered. 
If malignant neoplasms of more than one site are entered on the certificate, the site listed as primary or 
not indicated whether primary or secondary should be selected (see D, E and F above). 
Multiple sites with none specified as primary 
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of Rule H to c onsider only sites in Part I, if one of the 
common sites of metastases, excluding lung, and another site or morphological type are 
mentioned anywhere on the certificate, code to the other site. If, however, a malignant 
neoplasm of lymphatic, haematopoietic, or related tissue appears in Part II, only Part I should 
be considered. 
Example 36: I (a) Cancer of stomach 
 (b) Cancer of liver 
Code to malignant neoplasm of stomach (C16.9). Although the sequence 
suggests that the liver was the primar y site, metastasis from liver - a common 
site of metastases - to stomach is improbable and it is assumed that the stomach 
cancer metastasized to the liver. 
Example 37: I (a) Peritoneal cancer 
II  Mammary carcinoma 
Code to malignant neoplasm of breast (C50.9), since the peritoneal cancer is 
presumed secondary because it is on the list of common sites of metastases. 
(b) Malignant neoplasms described as one site “or” a nother, or if “or” is implied, should be coded 
to the category that embraces both sites. If no appropriate category exists, code to the 
unspecified site of the morphological type involved.  This rule applies to all sites whether they 
are on the list of common sites of metastases or not. 
Example 38: I (a) Carcinoma of ascending or descending colon 
Code to malignant neoplasm of colon, unspecified (C18.9). 
Example 39: I (a) Osteosarcoma of lumbar vertebrae or sacrum 
Code to malignant neoplasm of bone, unspecified (C41.9). 

--- PAGE 66 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
60 
(c) If two or more morphological types of malignant neoplasm occur in lymphoid, haematopoietic 
or related tissue (C81-C96), code according to the sequence given since these neoplasms 
sometimes terminate as another entity within C81-C96. Acute exacerbation of, or blastic crisis 
in, chronic leukaemia should be coded to the chronic form. 
Example 40: I (a) Acute lymphocytic leukaemia 
 (b) Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma 
Code to non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (C85.9). 
Example 41: I (a) Acute and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia 
Code to chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (C91.1). 
Multiple sites in the same organ system 
If the sites mentioned are in the same organ system and are contiguous, the .8 subcategories, including 
those listed in Volume 1, should be used. This a pplies when the certificate describes the sites as one 
site “and” another or if the sites are mentioned on separate lines. Code to the .8 subcategory that 
embraces both sites. If there is any doubt about the c ontiguity of the sites mentioned, code to the 
unspecified site of the organ mentioned. 
(a) If there is mention of two contiguous subsites in  the same site, code to the .8 subcategory of 
that three-character category. 
Example 42: I (a) Carcinoma of descending colon and sigmoid 
Code to overlapping malignant neoplasm of colon (C18.8). 
(b) If the subsites are not contiguous, code to the .9  subcategory of that three-character category. 
Example 43: I (a) Carcinoma of head of pancreas 
 (b) Carcinoma of tail of pancreas 
Code to malignant neoplasm of pancreas, unspecified (C25.9). 
 (c) If there is mention of two contiguous sites classified to separate th ree-character categories 
within the same body system, code to the .8 subcategory of that general body system (see list 
in Note 5 in the introduction to Chapter II of Volume 1). 
Example 44: I (a) Carcinoma of vagina and cervix 
Code to malignant neoplasm of overla pping sites of female genital organs 
(C57.8). 
(d) If two sites are mentioned on the certificate and both are in the same organ system and have 
the same morphological type, code to the .9 subcategory of that organ system, as in the 
following list: 
C26.9 Ill-defined sites within the digestive system 
C39.9 Ill-defined sites within the respiratory system 
C41.9 Bone and articular cartilage, unspecified 
C49.9 Connective and soft tissue, unspecified 
C57.9 Female genital organ, unspecifie 
C63.9 Male genital organ, unspecified 
C68.9 Urinary organ, unspecified 
C72.9 Central nervous system, unspecified 
Example 45: I (a) Pulmonary embolism 
 (b) Cancer of stomach 
 (c) Cancer of gallbladder 
Code to ill-defined sites within the digestive system (C26.9). 

--- PAGE 67 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
61 
(e) If there is no available .8 or .9 subcategor y, code to malignant neoplasms of independent 
(primary) multiple sites (C97). 
Example 46: I (a) Cardiac arrest 
 (b) Carcinoma of prostate and bladder 
Code to malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites (C97), 
since there is no available .8 subcategory. 
I. Infectious diseases and malignant neoplasms 
(a) Owing to the effect of chemotherapy on the immune system, some cancer patients become 
prone to infectious diseases and die of them. Th erefore, any infectious disease classified to 
A00-B19 or B25-B64 reported as “due to” cancer  will be an acceptable sequence whether in 
Part I or II. 
Example 47: I (a) Zoster 
 (b) Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia 
Code to chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (C91.1). 
(b) Except for human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease, no infectious or parasitic disease 
will be accepted as causing a malignant neoplasm. 
Example 48: I (a) Hepatocellular carcinoma 
 (b) Hepatitis B virus 
Code to hepatocellular carcinoma (C22.0). 
Example 49: I (a) Burkitt’s tumour 
 (b) Epstein-Barr virus 
Code to Burkitt’s tumour (C83.7). 
Example 50: I (a) Cholangiocarcinoma of liver 
 (b) Clonorchiasis 
Code to malignant neoplasm of intrahepatic bile duct (C22.1). 

--- PAGE 68 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
62 
 
J. Malignant neoplasms and circulatory disease 
The following acute or fatal circulatory diseases will be accepted in Part I as due to malignant 
neoplasms: 
I21-I22 Acute myocardial infarction 
I24.- Other acute ischaemic heart diseases 
I26.- Pulmonary embolism 
I30.- Acute pericarditis 
I33.- Acute and subacute endocarditis 
I40.- Acute myocarditis 
I44.- Atrioventricular and left bundle-branch block 
I45.- Other conduction disorders 
I46.- Cardiac arrest 
I47.- Paroxysmal tachycardia 
I48 Atrial fibrillation and flutter 
I49.- Other cardiac arrhythmias 
I50.- Heart failure 
I51.8 Other ill-defined heart diseases 
I60-I69 Cerebrovascular diseases, except I67.0-I67.5, I67.9, I69.- 
The following circulatory diseases will not be accepted as due to malignant neoplasms:  
I00-I09 Rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease 
I10-I15 Hypertensive disease (except when re ported as due to endocrine neoplasms, renal 
neoplasms and carcinoid tumours) 
I20.- Angina pectoris 
I25.- Chronic ischaemic heart disease 
I70.- Atherosclerosis 
 
4.2.8 Rheumatic fever with heart involvement 
If there is no statement that the rheumatic process w as active at the time of death, assume activity if 
the heart condition (other than terminal conditions  and bacterial endocarditis) that is specified as 
rheumatic, or stated to be due to rheumatic fever, is described as acute or s ubacute. In the absence of 
such description, the terms “carditis”, “endocarditis”, “heart disease”, “myocarditis”, and “pancarditis” 
can be regarded as acute if either the interval betw een onset and death is less than one year or, if no 
interval is stated, the age at death is under l5 years. “Pericarditis” can be regarded as acute at any age. 

--- PAGE 69 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
63 
 
4.2.9 Congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities 
The following conditions may be regarded as conge nital when causing death at the ages stated 
provided there is no indication that they were acquired after birth. 
• Under l year:  aneurysm, aortic stenosis, atresia, atrophy of brain, cyst of brain, deformity, 
displacement of organ, ectopia, hypoplasia of organ, malformation, pulmonary stenosis, 
valvular heart disease. 
• Under 4 weeks:  heart disease NOS, hydrocephalus NOS. 
If the interval between onset and death and the age of the decedent indicate that the condition existed 
from birth, any disease should be regarded as congen ital even when not specified as congenital on the 
medical certificate. 
4.2.10 Nature of injury 
The codes for external causes (V01-Y89) should be  used as the primary codes for single-condition 
coding and tabulation of mortality involving inju ry, poisoning and certain other consequences of 
external causes. 
It is recommended that a code from Chapter XIX (S 00-T98) should be used in addition in order to 
identify the nature of the injury and permit rele vant tabulations. The following notes refer to such 
coding. 
Where more than one kind of injury to a single body region in S00-S99, T08-T35, T66-T79 is 
mentioned and there is no clear indication as to wh ich caused death, the General Principle and the 
Selection Rules should be applied in the normal way. 
Example 1: I (a) Haemorrhagic shock 
 (b) Peritoneal haemorrhage 
 (c) Rupture of liver 
 (d) Road traffic accident 
Select rupture of liver (S36.1), since this is the starting point of the sequence 
terminating in the condition first entered on the certificate. 
Example 2: I (a) Fat embolism 
 (b) Fracture of femur 
 (c) Laceration of thigh 
 (d) Road traffic accident 
Select fracture of femur (S72.9), since this is the starting point of the sequence 
terminating in the condition first entered on the certificate. It is “highly improbable” 
that laceration of the thigh would give rise to all the conditions mentioned above it. 
Example 3: I (a) Peritonitis 
 (b) Rupture of stomach and transverse colon 
 (c) Road traffic accident 
Select rupture of stomach (S36.3), since this is the starting point of the first-mentioned 
sequence (in accordance with Rule l). 
Example 4: I (a) Purulent meningitis 
 (b) Contusion of eyelid a nd penetrating wound of orbit 
Select penetrating wound of orbit (S05.4), since contusion of eyelid selected by Rule 2 
is obviously a direct consequence of the penetrating wound of the orbit (Rule 3 is 
applied). 

--- PAGE 70 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
64 
When more than one body region is involved, codi ng should be made to the relevant category of 
Injuries involving multiple body regions (T00-T06). This applies both to the same type of injury and 
to more than one kind of injury to different body regions. 
4.2.11 Poisoning by drugs, medicaments and biological substances 
When combinations of medicinal agents classified differently are involved, proceed as follows: if one 
component of the combination is specified as the cause of death, code to that component; if no 
component is specified as the cause of death, code to the category provided for the combination, e.g. 
mixed antiepileptics (T42.5). Otherwise, if the co mponents are classified to the same three-character 
category, code to the appropriate subcategory for “Other”; if not, code to T50.9. 
Combinations of medicinal agents with alcohol should be coded to the medicinal agent. 
4.2.12 External causes 
The codes for external causes (V01-Y89) should be  used as the primary codes for single-condition 
coding and tabulation of the underlying cause wh en, and only when, the morbid condition is 
classifiable to Chapter XIX (Injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes). 
When the morbid condition is classified to Chapte rs I-XVIII, the morbid condition itself should be 
coded as the underlying cause and categories from the chapter for external causes may be used, if 
desired, as supplementary codes. 
4.2.13 Expressions indicating doubtful diagnosis 
Qualifying expressions indicating some doubt as to the accuracy of the diagnosis, such as 
“apparently”, “presumably”, “possibly”, etc., should be ignored, since entries without such 
qualification differ only in the degree of certainty of the diagnosis. 
4.2.14 Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) 
When a blood transfusion is given as treatment for any condition (e.g. a haematological disorder) and 
an infected blood supply results in a HIV infecti on, code the HIV as the underlying cause and not the 
treated condition. 
Example 1: I (a) Kaposi’s sarcoma  1 year 
 (b) HIV   3 years 
 (c) Blood transfusion  5 years 
 (d) Haemophilia  since birth 
Code to HIV. 
Example 2: I (a) Pneumocystis carinii   6 months 
 (b) HIV   5 years 
 (c) Ruptured spleen  7 years 
 (d) Assault – fist fight 7 years 
Code to HIV. 
4.3 Perinatal mortality: guidelines for certification and rules for coding 
4.3.1 Certification of perinatal deaths 
Whenever possible, a separate certificate of cause of perinatal death should be completed, in which the 
causes are set out as follows: 
(a) Main disease or condition in fetus or infant 
(b) Other diseases or conditions in fetus or infant 

--- PAGE 71 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
65 
(c) Main maternal disease or condition affecting fetus or infant 
(d) Other maternal diseases or conditions affecting fetus or infant 
(e) Other relevant circumstances 
The certificate should include identifying particulars with relevant dates and times, a statement as to 
whether the baby was born alive or dead, and details of the autopsy. 
For a thorough analysis of perinatal mortality, the following data on both mother and child are needed, 
in addition to information about the causes of death, not only in the case of perinatal death, but also for 
all live births: 
Mother 
Date of birth 
Number of previous pregnancies: live births/ stillbirths/ abortions 
Date and outcome of last previous pregnancy: live birth/ stillbirth/abortion 
Present pregnancy: 
• first day of last menstrual period (if unknown,  then estimated duration of pregnancy in 
completed weeks) 
• antenatal care - two or more visits: yes/no/not known 
• delivery: normal spontaneous vertex/other (specify) 
Child 
Birth weight in grams 
Sex: boy/girl/indeterminate 
Single birth/first twin/second twin/other multiple birth 
If stillborn, when death occurred: before labour/during labour/not known 
Other variables that might appear on the basic certif icate include particulars of the birth attendant, as 
follows: physician/trained midwife/other trained person (specify)/other (specify). 
The method by which the supplementary data are coll ected will vary according to the civil registration 
system obtaining in different countries. Where they can  be collected at the registration of the stillbirth 
or early neonatal death, a form similar to the “Certificate of Cause of Perinatal Death” as shown below 
could be used. Otherwise, special arrangements woul d need to be made (for example, by linking birth 
and death records) to bring together the supplementary data and the cause of death. 
Where civil registration requirements make it di fficult to introduce a common death certificate for 
liveborn and stillborn infants, the problem could be met by separate certificates for stillbirths and early 
neonatal deaths, each incorporating the recommended format for the causes of death. 

--- PAGE 72 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
66 
4.3.2 Statement of causes of death 
The certificate has five sections for the entry of cau ses of perinatal deaths, labelled (a) to (e). In 
sections (a) and (b) should be entered diseases or cond itions of the infant or fetus, the single most 
important in section (a) and the remainder, if any, in section (b). By “the single most important” is 
meant  
the pathological condition that, in the opinion of the certifier, made the greatest contribution to the 
death of the infant or fetus. The mode of death, e.g. heart failure, asphyxia or anoxia, should not be 
entered in section (a) unless it was the only fetal or infant condition known. This also holds true for 
prematurity. 
In sections (c) and (d) should be entered all diseases or  conditions of the mother that, in the certifier’s 
opinion, had some adverse effect on the infant or fe tus. Again, the most important one of these should 
be entered in section (c) and the others, if any, in  section (d). Section (e) is for the reporting of any 
other circumstances that have a bearing on the d eath but cannot be described as a disease or condition 
of the infant or mother, e.g. delivery in the absence of an attendant. 
The following examples illustrate the statement of the causes of death for the cases described. 
Example 1. A woman, whose previous pregnancies had ended in spontaneous abortions at 12 and 
18 weeks, was admitted when 24 weeks pregnant, in premature labour. There was 
spontaneous delivery of a 700 g infant who died during the first day of life. The main 
finding at autopsy was “pulmonary immaturity”. 
 Causes of perinatal death: 
(a) Pulmonary immaturity 
(b) — 
(c) Premature labour, cause unknow 
(d) Recurrent aborter 
(e) — 

--- PAGE 73 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
67 


--- PAGE 74 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
68 
 
Example 2. A primigravida aged 26 years with a history of regular menstrual cycles received 
routine antenatal care starting at the 10th week of pregnancy. At 30-32 weeks, fetal 
growth retardation was noted clinically, and confirmed at 34 weeks. There was no 
evident cause apart from symptomless bacteriuria. A caesarean section was performed 
and a liveborn boy weighing 1600 g was delivered. The placenta weighed 300 g and 
was described as infarcted. Respiratory distress syndrome developed which was 
responding to treatment. The baby died suddenly on the third day. Autopsy revealed 
extensive pulmonary hyaline membrane and massive intraventricular haemorrhage. 
 Causes of perinatal death: 
(a) Intraventricular haemorrhage 
(b) Respiratory distress syndrome 
 Retarded fetal growth 
(c) Placental insufficiency 
(d) Bacteriuria in pregnancy 
 Caesarean section 
Example 3. A known diabetic, who was poorly controlle d during her first pregnancy, developed 
megaloblastic anaemia at 32 weeks. Labour was induced at 38 weeks. There was 
spontaneous delivery of an infant weighing 3200 g. The baby developed 
hypoglycaemia and died on the second day. Autopsy showed truncus arteriosus. 
 Causes of perinatal death: 
(a) Truncus arteriosus 
(b) Hypoglycaemia 
(c) Diabetes 
(d) Megaloblastic anaemia 
(e) — 
Example 4. A 30-year-old mother of a healthy four-year-old boy had a normal pregnancy apart 
from hydramnios. X-ray at 36 weeks suggested anencephaly. Labour was induced. A 
stillborn anencephalic fetus weighing 1500 g was delivered. 
 Causes of perinatal death: 
(a) Anencephaly 
(b) — 
(c) Hydramnios 
(d) — 
(e) — 
4.3.3 Tabulation of perinatal mortality by cause 
For statistics of perinatal mortality derived from the form of certificate shown in the accompanying 
documentation, full-scale multiple-cause analysis of  all conditions reported will yield the maximum 
benefit. Where this is impracticable, analysis of the main disease or condition in the fetus or infant 
(part (a)) and of the main maternal condition aff ecting the fetus or infant (part (c)) with cross-
tabulation of groups of these cond itions should be regarded as the minimum. Where it is necessary to 
select only one condition (for example, when it is necessary to incorporate early neonatal deaths in 
single-cause tables of deaths at all ages), the main disease or condition in the fetus or infant (part (a)) 
should be selected. 

--- PAGE 75 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
69 
 
4.3.4 Coding of causes of death 
Each condition entered in sections (a), (b), (c) and (d) should be coded separately. Maternal conditions 
affecting the infant or fetus, entered in sections (c) and (d), should be coded to categories P00-P04 and 
these codes should not be used for sections (a) and (b).  Conditions in the infant or fetus, entered in 
section (a), can be coded to any categories other than P00-P04 but will most often be coded to 
categories P05-P96 (Perinatal conditions) or Q00- Q99 (Congenital anomalies). Only one code should 
be entered for sections (a) and (c), but for secti ons (b) and (d) as many codes should be entered as 
there are conditions reported. 
Section (e) is for review of individual perinatal d eaths and will not normally need to be coded. If, 
however, a statistical analysis of the circumstances entered in section (e) is desired, some suitable 
categories may exist in Chapters XX and XXI; wher e this is not the case, users should devise their 
own coding system for this information. 
4.3.5 Coding rules 
The selection rules for general mortality do not apply to the perinatal death certificate. It may happen, 
however, that perinatal death certificates are recei ved on which the causes of death have not been 
entered in accordance with the guidelines given above. Whenever possible, these certificates should be 
corrected by the certifier, but if this is not possible, the following rules should be applied. 
Rule P1. Mode of death or prematurity entered in section (a). 
If heart or cardiac failure, asphyxia or anoxia (any condition in P20.-, P21.-) or prematurity 
(any condition in P07.-) is entered in section (a) and other conditions of the infant or fetus are 
entered in either section (a) or section (b), code the first-mentioned of these other conditions as if 
it had been entered alone in section (a) and code the condition actually entered in section (a) as if 
it had been entered in section (b). 
Example 1: Liveborn; death at 4 days Coding 
(a) Prematurity Q05.9 
(b) Spina bifida  P07.3 
(c) Placental insufficiency P02.2 
(d) — 
Prematurity is coded at (b) and spina bifida at (a). 
Example 2: Liveborn; death at 50 minutes Coding 
(a) Severe birth asphyxia  Q03.9 
 Hydrocephalus 
(b) — P21.0 
(c) Obstructed labour P03.1 
(d) Severe pre-eclampsia  P00.0 
Severe birth asphyxia is coded at (b) and hydrocephalus at (a). 

--- PAGE 76 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
70 
 
Rule P2. Two or more conditions entered in sections (a) or (c). 
If two or more conditions are entered in section (a ) or section (c), code the first-mentioned of 
these as if it had been entered alone in section (a) or (c) and code the others as if they had been 
entered in sections (b) or (d). 
Example 3: Stillborn; death before onset of labour  Coding 
(a) Severe fetal malnutrition  P05.0 
 Light for dates 
 Antepartum anoxia 
(b) — P20.9 
(c) Severe pre-eclampsia  P00.0 
 Placenta praevia 
(d) — P02.0 
Light for dates with fetal malnutrition is c oded at (a) and antepartum anoxia at (b); 
severe pre-eclampsia is coded at (c) and placenta praevia at (d). 
Example 4: Liveborn; death at 2 days Coding 
(a) Traumatic subdural haemorrhage   P10.0 
 Massive inhalation of meconium 
 Intrauterine anoxia 
(b) Hypoglycaemia P24.0 
 Prolonged pregnancy P20.9 
  P70.4 
  P08.2 
(c) Forceps delivery P03.2 
(d) Severe pre-eclampsia P00.0 
Traumatic subdural haemorrhage is coded at (a) and the other conditions entered in (a) 
are coded at (b). 
Rule P3. No entry in sections (a) or (c). 
If there is no entry in section (a) but there are condi tions of the infant or fetus entered in section 
(b), code the first-mentioned of these as if it  had been entered in section (a); if there are no 
entries in either section (a) or section (b), either co de P95 (Fetal death of unspecified cause) for 
stillbirths or code P96.9 (Condition originating in the perinatal period, unspecified) for early 
neonatal deaths should be used for section (a). 
Similarly, if there is no entry in section (c) but  there are maternal conditions entered in section 
(d), code the first-mentioned of these as if it  had been entered in section (c); if there are no 
entries in either section (c) or section (d) use some  artificial code, e.g. xxx.x for section (c) to 
indicate that no maternal condition was reported. 
Example 5: Liveborn; death at 15 minutes Coding 
(a) — P10.4 
(b) Tentorial tear  P22.0 
 Respiratory distress syndrome 
(c)  xxx.x 
(d) — 
Tentorial tear is coded at (a); xxx.x is coded at (c). 

--- PAGE 77 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
71 
 
Example 6: Liveborn; death at 2 days Coding 
(a) — P95 
(b) — 
(c) — P00.0 
(d) Eclampsia (longstanding essential hypertension) 
Unspecified perinatal cause is coded at (a); eclampsia is coded at (c). 
Rule P4. Conditions entered in wrong section. 
If a maternal condition (i.e. conditions in P00-P04) is entered in section (a) or section (b), or if a 
condition of the infant or fetus is entered in sect ion (c) or section (d), code the conditions as if 
they had been entered in the respective correct section. 
If a condition classifiable as a condition of the infant or fetus or as a maternal condition is 
mistakenly entered in section (e), code it as an additional fetal or maternal condition in section 
(b) or (d) respectively. 
Example 7: Stillborn; death after onset of labour Coding 
(a) Severe intrauterine hypoxia  P20.9 
(b) Persistent occipitoposterior 
(c) — P03.1 
(d) — P03.2 
(e) Difficult forceps delivery 
Persistent occipitoposterior is coded at (c); difficult forceps delivery is coded at (d). 
4.4 Morbidity 
At the time of the sixth revision of the ICD, adopted in 1948, a number of requests were received from 
public health administrators, health care manage rs, social security authorities and researchers in 
various health disciplines for a classification suita ble for morbidity applications. The ICD was, 
therefore, made suitable for grouping morbidity da ta, in addition to its traditional uses, and the 
morbidity aspect has since been progressively e xpanded through successive revisions. Morbidity data 
are increasingly being used in the formulation of  health policies and programmes, and in their 
management, monitoring and evaluation, in epidemiol ogy, in identification of risk populations, and in 
clinical research (including studies of disease occurrence in different socioeconomic groups). 
The condition to be used for single-condition morbid ity analysis is the main condition treated or 
investigated during the relevant episode of health care. The main condition is defined as the condition, 
diagnosed at the end of the episode of health care,  primarily responsible for the patient’s need for 
treatment or investigation. If there is more than one  such condition, the one held most responsible for 
the greatest use of resources should be selected. If no diagnosis was made, the main symptom, 
abnormal finding or problem should be selected as the main condition. 
In addition to the main condition, the record shoul d, whenever possible, also list separately other 
conditions or problems dealt with during the episode  of health care. Other conditions are defined as 
those conditions that coexist or develop during the episode of health care and affect the management 
of the patient. Conditions related to an earlier ep isode that have no bearing on the current episode 
should not be recorded. 
By limiting analysis to a single condition for each epis ode, some available information may be lost. It 
is therefore recommended, where practicable, to carry out multiple-condition coding and analysis to 
supplement the routine data. This should be done accord ing to local rules, since no international rules 
have been established. However, experience in other areas could be useful in developing local 
schemes. 

--- PAGE 78 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
72 
4.4.1 Guidelines for recording diagnostic information for single-condition analysis 
of morbidity data 
General 
The health care practitioner responsible for the patie nt’s treatment should select the main condition to 
be recorded, as well as any other conditions, for each episode of health care. This information should 
be organized systematically by using standard recording methods. A properly completed record is 
essential for good patient management and is a valuable  source of epidemiological and other statistical 
data on morbidity and other health care problems. 
Specificity and detail 
Each diagnostic statement should be as informative as possible in order to classify the condition to the 
most specific ICD category. Examples of such diagnostic statements include: 
• transitional cell carcinoma of trigone of bladder 
• acute appendicitis with perforation 
• diabetic cataract, insulin-dependent 
• meningococcal pericarditis 
• antenatal care for pregnancy-induced hypertension 
• diplopia due to allergic reaction to antihistamine taken as prescribed  
• osteoarthritis of hip due to an old hip fracture 
• fracture of neck of femur following a fall at home 
• third-degree burn of palm of hand. 
Uncertain diagnoses or symptoms 
If no definite diagnosis has been established by th e end of an episode of health care, then the 
information that permits the greatest degree of specificity and knowledge about the condition that 
necessitated care or investigation should be record ed. This should be done by stating a symptom, 
abnormal finding or problem, rather than qualifyi ng a diagnosis as “possible”, “questionable” or 
“suspected”, when it has been considered but not established. 
Contact with health services for reasons other than illness 
Episodes of health care or contact with health services are not restricted to the treatment or 
investigation of current illness or injury. Epis odes may also occur when someone who may not 
currently be sick requires or receives limited care or  services; the details of the relevant circumstances 
should be recorded as the “main condition”. Examples include: 
• monitoring of previously treated conditions 
• immunization 
• contraceptive management, antenatal and postpartum care 
• surveillance of persons at risk because of personal or family history 
• examinations of healthy persons, e.g. for insurance or occupational reasons 
• seeking of health-related advice 
• requests for advice by persons with social problems 
• consultation on behalf of a third party. 
Chapter XXI (Factors influencing health status a nd contact with health services) provides a broad 
range of categories (Z00-Z99) for classifying these ci rcumstances; reference to this chapter will give 
an indication of the detail required to permit classification to the most relevant category. 

--- PAGE 79 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
73 
 
Multiple conditions 
Where an episode of health care concerns a numbe r of related conditions (e.g. multiple injuries, 
multiple sequelae of a previous illness or injury, or multiple conditions occurring in human 
immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease), the one that is clearly more severe and demanding of 
resources than the others should be recorded as the “main condition” and the others as “other 
conditions”. Where no one condition predominates, a term such as “multiple fractures”, “multiple head 
injuries”, or “HIV disease resulting in multiple inf ections” may be recorded as the “main condition”, 
followed by a list of the conditions. If there are a number of such conditions, with none 
predominating, then a term such as “multiple injuries” or “multiple crushing injuries” should be 
recorded alone. 
Conditions due to external causes 
When a condition such as an injury, poisoning or ot her effect of external causes is recorded, it is 
important to describe fully both the nature of the condition and the circumstances that gave rise to it. 
For example: “fracture of neck of femur caused by fall due to slipping on greasy pavement”; “cerebral 
contusion caused when patient lost control of car , which hit a tree”; “accidental poisoning - patient 
drank disinfectant in mistake for soft drink”; or “severe hypothermia - patient fell in her garden in cold 
weather”. 
Treatment of sequelae 
Where an episode of care is for the treatment or investigation of a residual condition (sequela) of a 
disease that is no longer present, the sequela should be fully described and its origin stated, together 
with a clear indication that the original disease is  no longer present. For example: “deflected nasal 
septum - fracture of nose in childhood”, “contracture of Achilles tendon - late effect of injury to 
tendon”, or “infertility due to tubal occlusion from old tuberculosis”. 
Where multiple sequelae are present and treatment or investigation is not directed predominantly at 
one of them, a statement such as “sequelae of cerebrovascular accident” or “sequelae of multiple 
fractures” is acceptable. 
4.4.2 Guidelines for coding “main condition” and “other conditions” 
General 
The “main condition” and “other conditions” relevant to an episode of health care should have been 
recorded by the responsible health care practitioner,  and coding is therefore usually straightforward, 
since the main condition stated should be accepted for coding and processing unless it is obvious that 
the guidelines given above have not been followed. Whenever possible, a record with an obviously 
inconsistent or incorrectly recorded main cond ition should be returned for clarification. Failing 
clarification, Rules MB1 to MB5 (section 4.4.3) will help the coder to deal with some of the 
commoner causes of incorrect recording. The guidelin es given below are for use when the coder may 
be unclear as to which code should be used. 
It has been recommended that “other conditions” in relation to an episode of care should be recorded 
in addition to the main condition, even for single- cause analysis, since this information may assist in 
choosing the correct ICD code for the main condition. 
Optional additional codes 
In the guidelines below, a preferred code for the “main condition” is sometimes indicated, together 
with an optional additional code to give more in formation. The preferred code indicates the “main 
condition” for single-cause analysis and an add itional code may be included for multiple-cause 
analysis. 
Coding of conditions to which the dagger and asterisk system applies 
If applicable, both dagger and asterisk codes should be  used for the main condition, since they denote 
two different pathways for a single condition. 

--- PAGE 80 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
74 
Example 1: Main condition: Measles pneumonia 
Other conditions: — 
Code to measles complicated by pneumonia (B05.2†) and pneumonia in viral diseases 
classified elsewhere (J17.1*). 
Example 2: Main condition: Tuberculous pericarditis 
Other conditions: — 
Code to tuberculosis of other specified or gans (A18.8†) and pericarditis in bacterial 
diseases classified elsewhere (I32.0*). 
Example 3: Main condition: Lyme disease arthritis 
Other conditions: — 
Code to Lyme disease (A69.2†) and arthritis in Lyme disease (M01.2*). 
Coding of suspected conditions, symptoms and abnormal findings and non-illness 
situations 
If the period of health care was for an inpatient, the coder should be cautious about classifying the 
main condition to Chapters XVIII and XXI. If a more specific diagnosis has not been made by the end 
of the inpatient stay, or if there was truly no c odable current illness or injury, then codes from the 
above chapters are permissible (see also Rules MB3 and MB5, section 4.4.3). The categories can be 
used in the normal way for other episodes of contact with health services. 
If, after an episode of health care, the main cond ition is still recorded as “suspected”, “questionable”, 
etc., and there is no further information or clarifi cation, the suspected diagnosis must be coded as if 
established. 
Category Z03.- (Medical observation and evaluati on for suspected diseases and conditions) applies to 
suspected diagnoses that can be ruled out after investigation. 
Example 4: Main condition: Suspected acute cholecystitis 
Other conditions: — 
Code to acute cholecystitis (K81.0) as “main condition”. 
Example 5: Main condition: Admitted for investigation of suspected malignant neoplasm of 
cervix - ruled out 
Code to observation for suspected malignant neoplasm (Z03.1) as “main condition”. 
Example 6: Main condition: Ruled out myocardial infarction 
Other conditions: — 
Code to observation for suspected myocardial infarction (Z03.4) as “main condition”. 
Example 7: Main condition: Severe epistaxis 
Other conditions: — 
Patient in hospital one day. No procedures or investigations reported 
Code to epistaxis (R04.0). This is accepta ble since the patient was obviously admitted 
to deal with the immediate emergency only. 
Coding of multiple conditions 
Where multiple conditions are recorded in a cat egory entitled “Multiple ...”, and no single condition 
predominates, the code for the “Multiple ...” cat egory should be used as the preferred code, and 
optional additional codes may be added for individual conditions listed. 
Such coding applies mainly to conditions associated with HIV disease, to injuries and sequelae. 

--- PAGE 81 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
75 
Coding of combination categories 
The ICD provides certain categories where two cond itions or a condition and an associated secondary 
process can be represented by a single code. Such co mbination categories should be used as the main 
condition where appropriate information is record ed. The Alphabetical Index indicates where such 
combinations are provided for, under the indent “w ith”, which appears immediately after the lead 
term. Two or more conditions recorded under “main condition” may be linked if one of them may be 
regarded as an adjectival modifier of the other. 
Example 8: Main condition: Renal failure 
Other conditions: Hypertensive renal disease 
Code to hypertensive renal disease with renal failure (I12.0) as the “main condition”. 
Example 9: Main condition: Glaucoma secondary to eye inflammation 
Other conditions: — 
Code to glaucoma secondary to eye inflammation (H40.4) as the “main condition”. 
Example 10: Main condition: Intestinal obstruction 
Other conditions: Left inguinal hernia 
Code to unilateral or unspecified inguinal hernia, with obstruction, without gangrene 
(K40.3). 
Example 11: Main condition: Cataract. Insulin-dependent diabetes 
Other conditions: Hypertension 
Specialty: Ophthalmology 
Code to insulin-dependent diabetes with  ophthalmic complications (E10.3†) and 
diabetic cataract (H28.0
*) as the “main condition”. 
Example 12: Main condition: Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
Other conditions: Hypertension 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Cataract 
Specialty: General medicine 
Code to non-insulin-dependent diabetes without complications (E11.9) as “main 
condition”. Note that in this example the li nkage of cataract with diabetes must not be 
made since they are not both recorded under “main condition”. 

--- PAGE 82 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
76 
 
Coding of external causes of morbidity 
For injuries and other conditions due to external  causes, both the nature of the condition and the 
circumstances of the external cause should be coded. The  preferred “main condition” code should be 
that describing the nature of the condition. This w ill usually, but not always, be classifiable to Chapter 
XIX. The code from Chapter XX indicating the extern al cause would be used as an optional additional 
code. 
Example 13: Main condition: Fracture of neck of femur caused by fall due to tripping on 
uneven pavement 
Other conditions: Contusions  to elbow and upper arm 
Code to fracture of neck of femur (S72.0) as “main condition”. The external cause 
code for fall on same level from slipping, tr ipping or stumbling on street or highway 
(W01.4) may be used as an optional additional code. 
Example 14: Main condition: Severe hypothermia - patie nt fell in her garden in cold weather 
Other conditions: Senility 
Code to hypothermia (T68) as “main condition”. The external cause code for exposure 
to excessive natural cold at home (X31.0) may be used as an optional additional code. 
Example 15: Main condition: Diplopia due to allerg ic reaction to antihistamine taken as 
prescribed 
Other conditions:  — 
Code to diplopia (H53.2) as the “main condition”. The external cause code for 
antiallergic and antiemetic drugs causing adve rse effects in therapeutic use (Y43.0) 
may be used as an optional additional code. 
Example 16: Main condition: Haemoglobinuria caused by training for marathon run (training 
on outdoor track at stadium) 
Other conditions: — 
Code to haemoglobinuria due to haemolysis from other external causes (D59.6) as 
“main condition”. The external cause code  for overexertion and strenuous, repetitive 
movements at sports and athletics area (X50.3) may be used as an optional additional 
code. 
Coding of sequelae of certain conditions 
The ICD provides a number of categories entitled “Sequel ae of  ...” (B90-B94, E64.-, E68, G09, I69.-, 
O97, T90-T98, Y85-Y89) which may be used to indicate conditions no longer present as the cause of a 
current problem undergoing treatment or investigation. The preferred code for the “main condition” is, 
however, the code for the nature of the sequela itsel f, to which the code for “Sequelae of ...” may be 
added as an optional additional code. 
Where a number of different very specific sequelae are present and no one of them predominates in 
severity and use of resources for treatment, it is perm issible for the description “Sequelae of ...” to be 
recorded as the “main condition” and this may then be  coded to the appropriate category. Note that it 
is sufficient that the causal cond ition is described as “old”, “no longer present”, etc. or the resulting 
condition is described as “late effect of ...”, or “seque la of ...” for this to apply. There is no minimum 
time interval. 
Example 17: Main condition: Dysphasia from old cerebral infarction 
Other conditions: — 
Code to dysphasia (R47.0) as the “main condition”. The code for sequelae of cerebral 
infarction (I69.3) may be used as an optional additional code. 

--- PAGE 83 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
77 
Example 18: Main condition: Osteoarthritis of hip joint due to old hip fracture from motor 
vehicle accident 10 years ago 
Other conditions:  — 
Code to other post-traumatic coxarthrosis  (M16.5) as the “main condition”. The codes 
for sequelae of fracture of femur (T93.1) and sequelae of motor vehicle accident 
(Y85.0) may be used as optional additional codes. 
Example 19: Main condition: Late effects of poliomyelitis 
Other conditions: — 
Code to sequelae of poliomyelitis (B91) as the “main condition” since no other 
information is available. 
Coding of acute and chronic conditions 
Where the main condition is recorded as being bot h acute (or subacute) and chronic, and the ICD 
provides separate categories or subcategories for each , but not for the combination, the category for 
the acute condition should be used as the preferred main condition. 
Example 20: Main condition: Acute and chronic cholecystitis 
Other conditions: — 
Code to acute cholecystitis (K81.0) as th e “main condition”. The code for chronic 
cholecystitis (K81.1) may be used as an optional additional code. 
Example 21: Main condition: Acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive bronchitis 
Other conditions: — 
Code to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with acute exacerbation (J44.1) as the 
“main condition” since the ICD provides an appropriate code for the combination. 
Coding of postprocedural conditions and complications 
Categories are provided in Chapter XIX (T80-T88) fo r certain complications related to surgical and 
other procedures, e.g. surgical wound infections, mechanical complications of implanted devices, 
shock, etc. Most body-system chapters also contai n categories for conditions that occur either as a 
consequence of specific procedures and techniques or  as a result of the removal of an organ, e.g. 
postmastectomy lymphoedema syndrome, post-irradi ation hypothyroidism. Some conditions (e.g. 
pneumonia, pulmonary embolism) that may arise in the postprocedural period are not considered 
unique entities and are, therefore, coded in the us ual way, but an optional additional code from Y83-
Y84 may be added to identify the relationship to a procedure. 
When postprocedural conditions and complications ar e recorded as the main condition, reference to 
modifiers or qualifiers in the Alphabetical Index is essential for choosing the correct code. 
Example 22: Main condition: Hypothyroidism since thyroidectomy 1 year ago 
Other conditions: — 
Specialty: General medicine 
Code to postsurgical hypothyroidism (E89.0) as the “main condition”. 
Example 23: Main condition: Excessive haemorrhage after tooth extraction 
Other conditions: Pain 
Specialty: Dentistry 
Code to haemorrhage resulting from a procedure (T81.0) as the “main condition”. 
Example 24: Main condition: Postoperative ps ychosis after plastic surgery 
Other conditions: — 
Specialty: Psychiatry 
Code to psychosis (F09) as the “main c ondition” and supplement by Y83.8 (other 
specified surgical procedur es [as the cause of abnormal reaction of the patient]) to 
indicate the postprocedural relationship. 

--- PAGE 84 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
78 
4.4.3 Rules for reselection when the main condition is incorrectly recorded 
The responsible health care practitioner indicates the “main condition” to be coded, and this should 
normally be accepted for coding subject to the guide lines above and in the chapter-specific notes in 
section 4.4.4. However, certain circumstances or the availability of other information may indicate that 
the  health care practitioner has not followed the co rrect procedure. If it is not possible to obtain 
clarification from the health care practitioner, one of  the following rules may be applied and the “main 
condition” reselected. 
Rules for reselection of main condition 
Rule MB1. Minor condition recorded as “main condition”, more significant condition 
recorded as “other condition” 
Where a minor or longstanding condition, or an incidental problem, is recorded as the “main 
condition”, and a more significant condition, relevant to the treatment given and/or the specialty that 
cared for the patient, is recorded as an “other condition”, reselect the latter as the “main condition”. 
Rule MB2. Several conditions recorded as “main condition”. 
If several conditions that cannot be coded together  are recorded as the “main condition”, and other 
details on the record point to one of them as the “main condition” for which the patient received care, 
select that condition. Otherwise select the condition first mentioned. 
Rule MB3. Condition recorded as “main condition” is presenting symptom of 
diagnosed, treated condition 
If a symptom or sign (usually classifiable to Chapter XVIII), or a problem classifiable to Chapter XXI, 
is recorded as the “main condition” and this is obviously the presenting sign, symptom or problem of a 
diagnosed condition recorded elsewhere and care w as given for the latter, reselect the diagnosed 
condition as the “main condition”. 
Rule MB4. Specificity 
Where the diagnosis recorded as the “main conditi on” describes a condition in general terms, and a 
term that provides more precise information about th e site or nature of the condition is recorded 
elsewhere, reselect the latter as the “main condition”. 
Rule MB5. Alternative main diagnoses 
Where a symptom or sign is recorded as the “main c ondition” with an indication that it may be due to 
either one condition or another, select the symptom as the “main condition”. Where two or more 
conditions are recorded as diagnostic options fo r the “main condition”, select the first condition 
recorded. 
Examples of application of the rules for reselection of main condition 
Rule MB1. Minor condition recorded as “main condition”, more significant condition 
recorded as “other condition” 
Where a minor or longstanding condition, or an incidental problem, is recorded as the “main 
condition”, and a more significant condition, relevant to the treatment given and/or the specialty 
that cared for the patient, is recorded as an “other condition”, reselect the latter as the “main 
condition”. 
Example 1: Main condition: Acute sinusitis 
Other conditions: Carcinoma of endocervix 
 Hypertension 
 Patient in hospital for three weeks 
Procedure: Total hysterectomy 
Specialty: Gynaecology 
Reselect carcinoma of endocervix as the “main condition” and code to C53.0. 

--- PAGE 85 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
79 
Example 2: Main condition: Rheumatoid arthritis 
Other conditions: Diabetes mellitus 
 Strangulated femoral hernia 
 Generalized arteriosclerosis 
 Patient in hospital for two weeks 
Procedure: Herniorrhaphy 
Specialty: Surgery 
Reselect strangulated femoral hernia as the “main condition” and code to K41.3. 
Example 3: Main condition: Epilepsy 
Other conditions: Otomycosis 
Specialty: Ear, nose and throat 
Reselect otomycosis as the “main condition” and code to B36.9† and H62.2*. 
Example 4: Main condition: Congestive heart failure 
Other conditions: Fracture neck of femur due to fall from bed during 
 hospitalization 
 Patient in hospital for four weeks 
Procedure: Internal fixation of fracture 
Specialty: Internal medicine for 1 week then 
 transfer to orthopaedic surgery for 
 treatment of fracture 
Reselect fracture of neck of femur as the “main condition” and code to S72.0. 
Example 5: Main condition: Dental caries 
Other conditions: Rheumatic mitral stenosis 
Procedure: Dental extractions 
Specialty: Dentistry 
Select dental caries as the “main condition” and code to K02.9. Rule MB1 does not 
apply. Although dental caries can be regarded as a minor condition and rheumatic 
mitral stenosis as a more significant condition, the latter was not the condition treated 
during the episode of care. 
Rule MB2. Several conditions recorded as “main condition” 
If several conditions that cannot be coded toge ther are recorded as the “main condition”, and 
other details on the record point to one of th em as being the “main condition” for which the 
patient received care, select that condition. Otherwise select the condition first mentioned. 
Note:  See also 4.4.2, coding of multiple conditions and coding of combination categories. 
Example 6: Main condition: Cataract 
 Staphylococcal meningitis 
 Ischaemic heart disease 
Other conditions: — 
 Patient in hospital for five weeks 
Specialty: Neurology 
Select staphylococcal meningitis as the “main condition” and code to G00.3. 
Example 7:  Main condition: Chronic obstructive bronchitis 
 Hypertrophy of prostate 
 Psoriasis vulgaris 
Outpatient in the care of a dermatologist 
Select psoriasis vulgaris as the “main condition” and code to L40.0. 

--- PAGE 86 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
80 
Example 8: Main condition: Mitral stenosis 
 Acute bronchitis 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
Other conditions: — 
Specialty: General medicine 
No information about therapy 
Select mitral stenosis, the first-mentione d condition, as the “main condition” and code 
to I05.0. 
Example 9:  Main condition: Chronic gastritis 
Secondary malignancy in axillary lymph nodes 
Carcinoma of breast 
Other conditions: — 
Procedure: Mastectomy 
Select malignant neoplasm of breast as the “main condition” and code to C50.9. 
Example 10: Main condition: Premature rupture of membranes 
 Breech presentation 
 Anaemia 
Other conditions: — 
Procedure: Spontaneous delivery 
Select premature rupture of membranes, the first-mentioned condition, as the “main 
condition” and code to O42.9. 
Rule MB3. Condition recorded as “main condition” is presenting symptom of 
diagnosed, treated condition 
If a symptom or sign (usually classifiable to  Chapter XVIII), or a problem classifiable to 
Chapter XXI, is recorded as the “main condition” and this is obviously the presenting sign, 
symptom or problem of a diagnosed condition  recorded elsewhere and care was given for the 
latter, reselect the diagnosed condition as the “main condition”. 
Example 11: Main condition: Haematuria 
Other conditions: Varicose veins of legs 
 Papillomata of posterior wall of 
 bladder 
Treatment: Diathermy excision of papillomata 
Specialty: Urology 
Reselect papillomata of posterior wall of bl adder as the “main condition” and code to 
D41.4. 
Example 12: Main condition: Coma 
Other conditions: Ischaemic heart disease 
 Otosclerosis 
 Diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent 
Specialty: Endocrinology 
Care: Establishment of correct dose of 
 insulin 
Reselect diabetes mellitus, insulin-dependent  as the “main condition” and code to 
E10.0. The information provided indicates that the coma was due to diabetes mellitus 
and coma is taken into account as it modifies the coding. 
Example 13: Main condition: Abdominal pain 
Other conditions: Acute appendicitis 
Procedure: Appendectomy 
Reselect acute appendicitis as the “main condition” and code to K35.9. 

--- PAGE 87 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
81 
Example 14: Main condition: Febrile convulsions 
Other conditions: Anaemia 
No information about therapy 
Accept febrile convulsions as the “main condition” and code to R56.0. Rule MB3 does 
not apply since the “main condition” as reported is not a presenting symptom of the 
other reported condition. 
Rule MB4. Specificity   
Where the diagnosis recorded as the “main conditi on” describes a condition in general terms, 
and a term that provides more precise information about the site or nature of the condition is 
recorded elsewhere, reselect the latter as the “main condition”. 
Example 15: Main condition: Cerebrovascular accident 
Other conditions: Diabetes mellitus 
 Hypertension 
 Cerebral haemorrhage 
Reselect cerebral haemorrhage as the “main condition” and code to I61.9. 
Example 16: Main condition: Congenital heart disease 
Other conditions: Ventricular septal defect 
Reselect ventricular septal defect as the “main condition” and code to Q21.0. 
Example 17: Main condition: Enteritis 
Other conditions: Crohn’s disease of ileum 
Reselect Crohn’s disease of ileum as the “main condition” and code to K50.0. 
Example 18: Main condition: Dystocia 
Other conditions: Hydrocephalic fetus 
 Fetal distress 
Procedure: Caesarean section 
Reselect obstructed labour due to other a bnormalities of fetus as the “main condition” 
and code to O66.3. 
Rule MB5. Alternative main diagnoses   
Where a symptom or sign is recorded as the “main condition” with an indication that it may be 
due to either one condition or another, select the symptom as the “main condition”. Where two 
or more conditions are recorded as diagnostic opti ons for the “main condition”, select the first 
condition recorded. 
Example 19: Main condition: Headache due to either  stress and tension or acute sinusitis 
Other conditions: — 
Select headache as the “main condition” and code to R51. 
Example 20: Main condition: Acute cholecy stitis or acute pancreatitis 
Other conditions: — 
Select acute cholecystitis as the “main condition” and code to K81.0. 
Example 21: Main condition: Gastroenteritis due to infection or food poisoning 
Other conditions: — 
Select infectious gastroenteritis as the “main condition” and code to A09. 
4.4.4 Chapter-specific notes 
Guidance is given below for specific chapters where problems may be encountered in selecting 
preferred “main condition” codes. The preceding ge neral guidelines and rules apply to all chapters 
unless a specific chapter note states otherwise. 

--- PAGE 88 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
82 
Chapter I:  Certain infectious and parasitic diseases 
B20-B24  Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease  
A patient with a compromised immune system due to HIV disease may sometimes require treatment 
during the same episode of care for more than  one disease, for example mycobacterial and 
cytomegalovirus infections. Categories and subcat egories are provided in this block for HIV disease 
with various other resultant diseases. Code the a ppropriate subcategory for the “main condition” as 
selected by the health care practitioner. 
Where the “main condition” has been recorded  as HIV disease with multiple accompanying diseases, 
the appropriate .7 subcategory fro m B20-B22 should be coded. Conditi ons classifiable to two or more 
subcategories of the same category should be coded to the .7 subcategory of the relevant category (e.g. 
B20 or B21). Subcategory B22.7 should be used when conditions classifiable to two or more 
categories from B20-B22 are present. Additional cod es from within the block B20-B24 may be used, 
if desired, to specify the individual conditions listed. 
In those rare instances when th e associated condition clearly pr edates the HIV infection, the 
combination should not be coded and the selection rules should be followed. 
Example 1: Main condition: HIV disease and Kaposi’s sarcoma 
Other conditions: — 
 Code to HIV disease resulting in Kaposi’s sarcoma (B21.0). 
Example 2:  Main condition: Toxoplasmosis and cryptococcosis in HIV patient 
Other conditions: — 
Code to HIV disease resulting in multiple infections (B20.7). B20.8 (HIV disease 
resulting in other infectious and paras itic diseases) and B20.5 (HIV disease resulting 
in other mycoses) may be used as additional codes, if desired. 
Example 3: Main condition: HIV disease with Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, Burkitt’s 
lymphoma and oral candidiasis 
Other conditions: — 
Code to HIV disease resulting in multiple diseases (B22.7). Additional codes B20.6 
(HIV disease resulting in Pneumocystis carinii  pneumonia), B21.1 (HIV disease 
resulting in Burkitt’s lymphoma) and B20.4 (HIV disease resulting in candidiasis) 
may be used, if desired. 
The subcategories at B20-B23 are the only optional four-character codes for countries using the four-
character version of ICD-10. Where it is not desired to use these optional fourth-character 
subcategories, codes from elsewhere in the classification should be used as additional codes to identify 
the specific resultant conditions. In Example 1 a bove, the “main condition” would be coded to B21 
(HIV disease resulting in malignant neoplasm). Code C46.9 (Kaposi’s sarcoma) would be used as an 
additional code. In Example 2, the “main condition”  would be coded to B20 (HIV disease resulting in 
infectious and parasitic diseases). Codes B 58.9 (Toxoplasmosis, unspecified) and B45.9 
(Cryptococcosis, unspecified) would be used as additional codes. 
Whether to use the four-character subcategories of B20-B23 or multiple-cause coding to identify the 
specific conditions is a policy decision which should be made at the time ICD-10 is implemented. 
B90-B94  Sequelae of infectious and parasitic diseases  
These codes are not to be used as the preferred codes for “main condition” if the nature of the residual 
condition is recorded. When coding to the resi dual condition, B90-B94 may be used as optional 
additional codes (see 4.4.2, Coding of sequelae of certain conditions). 

--- PAGE 89 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
83 
B95-B97  Bacterial, viral and other infectious agents  
These codes are not to be used as “main condition” codes. The categories are provided for optional use 
as additional codes to identify the infectious agent or organism in diseases classified outside Chapter I. 
Infections of unspecified site due to these agents are classified elsewhere in Chapter I. 
Example 4: Main condition: Acute cystitis due to E. coli 
Other conditions: — 
Code to acute cystitis (N30.0) as the “main condition”, B96.2 ( E. coli as the cause of 
diseases classified to other chapters) may be used as an optional additional code. 
Example 5: Main condition: Bacterial infection 
Other conditions: — 
Code to bacterial infection, unspecified (A49.9), as the “main condition”, not to a code 
from B95-B97. 
Chapter II:  Neoplasms 
When coding neoplasms, refer to the notes introduci ng Chapter II in Volume 1 and to the introduction 
of the Alphabetical Index (Volume 3) regardi ng code assignment and the use of morphological 
descriptions. 
A neoplasm, whether primary or metastatic, that is the focus of care during a relevant episode of health 
care, should be recorded and coded as the “main condition”. When the “main condition” as recorded 
by the health care practitioner is a primary neoplasm  that is no longer present (having been removed 
during a previous episode of care), code as the “m ain condition” the neoplasm of the secondary site, 
the current complication, or the appropriate circum stance codable to Chapter XXI (see 4.4.1, Contact 
with health services for reasons other than illness) that  was the focus of the treatment or investigation 
during the current episode of care. An appropriate  code from Chapter XXI for personal history of 
neoplasm may be used as an optional additional code. 
Example 6:  Main condition: Carcinoma of prostate 
Other conditions: Chronic bronchitis 
Procedure:  Prostatectomy 
Code to malignant neoplasm of prostate (C61) as the “main condition”. 
Example 7: Main condition: Carcinoma of breast - resected two years ago 
Other conditions: Secondary carcinoma in lung 
Procedure: Bronchoscopy with biopsy 
Code to secondary malignant neoplasm of lung (C78.0) as the “main condition”. 
Z85.3 (Personal history of malignant neoplasm of breast) may be used as an optional 
additional code. 
Example 8: Main condition: Previously excised bladder cancer - admitted for follow-up 
examination by cystoscopy 
Other conditions: — 
Procedure: Cystoscopy 
Code to follow-up examination after surgery for malignant neoplasm (Z08.0) as the 
“main condition”. Z85.5 (Personal history of malignant neoplasm of urinary tract) 
may be used as an optional additional code. 
C80 Malignant neoplasm without specification of site  
C97 Malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites 
C80 should be used for “main condition” coding only when the health care practitioner has clearly 
recorded the neoplasm in such a manner. C97 should be used when the health care practitioner records 
as the “main condition” two or more independent  primary malignant neoplasms, none of which 
predominates. Additional codes may be used to identify the individual malignant neoplasms listed. 

--- PAGE 90 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
84 
Example 9: Main condition: Carcinomatosis 
Other conditions: — 
Code to malignant neoplasm without specification of site (C80). 
Example 10: Main condition: Multiple myeloma and primary adenocarcinoma of prostate 
Code to malignant neoplasms of independe nt (primary) multiple sites (C97). C90.0 
(Multiple myeloma) and C61 (Malignant neoplasm of prostate) may be used as 
optional additional codes. 
Chapter III: Diseases of the blood and blood- forming organs and certain disorders 
involving the immune mechanism 
Certain conditions classifiable to this chapter ma y result from drugs or other external causes. Codes 
from Chapter XX may be used as optional additional codes. 
Example 11: Main condition: Trimethoprim-induced folate deficiency anaemia 
Other conditions: — 
Code drug-induced folate deficiency anaemia (D52.1) as the “main condition”. Y41.2 
(Antimalarials and drugs acting on other blood protozoa causing adverse effects in 
therapeutic use) may be used as an optional additional code. 
Chapter IV:  Endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases 
Certain conditions classifiable to this chapter ma y result from drugs or other external causes. Codes 
from Chapter XX may be used as optional additional codes. 
E10-E14  Diabetes mellitus 
In coding the “main condition”, the selection of an appropriate subcategory from the list that applies to 
all of these categories should be based on the “m ain condition” as recorded by the health care 
practitioner. The subcategory .7 should be used as the “main condition” code only when multiple 
complications of diabetes have been recorded as the “main condition” without preference for any one 
complication. Codes for any individual complica tions listed may be adde d as optional additional 
codes. 
Example 12: Main condition: Renal failure due  to diabetic glomerulonephrosis 
Code to unspecified diabetes mellitus with renal complications (E14.2† and N08.3*). 
Example 13: Main condition: Insulin-dependent di abetic with nephropathy, gangrene and 
cataracts 
Other conditions: — 
Code to insulin-dependent diabetes mellitu s with multiple complications (E10.7). 
Codes E10.2† and N08.3 * (Insulin-dependent diabetes with nephropathy), E10.5 
(Insulin-dependent diabetes with peripheral circulatory complications) and E10.3† and 
H28.0* (Insulin-dependent diabetes with cataract) may be added as optional additional 
codes to identify the individual complications. 

--- PAGE 91 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
85 
E34.0  Carcinoid syndrome 
This code is not to be used as the preferred code  for the “main condition” if a carcinoid tumour is 
recorded, unless the episode of care was directed predominantly at the endocrine syndrome itself. 
When coding to the tumour, E34.0 may be used as an optional additional code to identify the 
functional activity. 
E64.-  Sequelae of malnutrition and other nutritional deficiencies  
E68  Sequelae of hyperalimentation 
These codes are not to be used as the preferred code  for the “main condition” if the nature of the 
residual condition is recorded. When coding to the r esidual condition, E64.- or E68 may be used as an 
optional additional code. 
Chapter V:  Mental and behavioural disorders 
The definitions of the categories and subcategories in this chapter are provided to assist the health care 
practitioner in establishing diagnostic labels; they s hould not be used by coders. The “main condition” 
code should be assigned on the basis of the diagnosis  recorded by the practitioner, even if there 
appears to be a conflict between the condition as reco rded and the definition. In some categories there 
is provision for optional additional codes. 
Chapter VI:  Diseases of the nervous system 
Certain conditions classifiable to this chapter may result from the effects of drugs or other external 
causes. Codes from Chapter XX may be used as optional additional codes. 
G09 Sequelae of inflammatory diseases of central nervous system 
This code is not to be used as the preferred code for the “main condition” if the nature of the residual 
condition is recorded. When coding to the resi dual condition, G09 may be used as an optional 
additional code. Note that sequelae of categories G01*, G02*, G05* and G07* should not be assigned to 
G09, but rather to the categories established for se quelae of the underlying condition, e.g. B90-B94. If 
there is no sequelae category for the underlying condition, code to the underlying condition itself. 
Example 14: Main condition: Deafness due to tuberculous meningitis 
Specialty: Speech and hearing clinic 
Code hearing loss, unspecified (H91.9) as the “main condition”. B90.0 (Sequelae of 
central nervous system tuberculosis) may be used as an optional additional code. 
Example 15: Main condition: Epilepsy due to old brain abscess 
Specialty: Neurology 
Code epilepsy, unspecified (G40.9) as the “main condition”. G09 (Sequelae of 
inflammatory diseases of central nervous system) may be used as an optional 
additional code. 
Example 16: Main condition: Mild mental retard ation after postimmunization encephalitis  
Specialty:  Psychiatry 
Code mild mental retardation (F70.9) as the “main condition”. G09 (Sequelae of 
inflammatory diseases of central nervous system) may be used as an optional 
additional code. 

--- PAGE 92 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
86 
G81-G83  Paralytic syndromes 
These codes are not to be used as the preferred c ode for the “main condition” if a current cause is 
recorded, unless the episode of care was mainly for the paralysis itself. When coding to the cause, 
G81-G83 may be used as optional additional codes. 
Example 17: Main condition: Cerebrovascular accident with hemiplegia 
Other conditions: — 
Specialty: Neurology 
Code stroke, not specified as haemorrhage or infarction (I64) as “main condition”. 
G81.9 (Hemiplegia, unspecified) may be used as an optional additional code. 
Example 18: Main condition: Cerebral infarction three years ago 
Other conditions: Paralysis of left leg 
Patient receiving physical therapy 
Code monoplegia of lower limb (G83.1) as “main condition”. I69.3 (Sequelae of 
cerebral infarction) may be used as an optional additional code. 
Chapter VII:  Diseases of the eye and adnexa 
H54.-  Blindness and low vision 
This code is not to be used as the preferred code  for the “main condition” if the cause is recorded, 
unless the episode of care was mainly for the blindn ess itself. When coding to the cause, H54.- may be 
used as an optional additional code. 
Chapter VIII:  Diseases of the ear and mastoid process 
H90-H91  Hearing loss 
These codes are not to be used as the preferred code  for the “main condition” if the cause is recorded, 
unless the episode of care was mainly for the heari ng loss itself. When coding to the cause, H90.- or 
H91.- may be used as an optional additional code. 
Chapter IX:  Diseases of the circulatory system 
I15.-  Secondary hypertension 
This code is not to be used as the preferred code  for the “main condition” if the cause is recorded, 
unless the episode of care was mainly for the hypert ension. When coding to the cause, I15.- may be 
used as an optional additional code. 
I69.-  Sequelae of cerebrovascular disease 
This code is not to be used as the preferred code for the “main condition” if the nature of the residual 
condition is recorded. When coding to the residua l condition, I69.- may be used as an optional 
additional code. 

--- PAGE 93 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
87 
Chapter XV:  Pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium 
O08.- Complications following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy 
This code is not to be used as the preferred code  for the “main condition”, except where a new episode 
of care is solely for treatment of a complication, e.g. a current complication of a previous abortion. It 
may be used as an optional additional code w ith categories O00-O02 to identify associated 
complications and with categories O03-O07 to give fuller details of the complication. 
Note that the inclusion terms provided at the s ubcategories of O08 should be referred to when 
assigning the fourth-character subcategories of O03-O07. 
Example 19: Main condition: Ruptured tubal pregnancy with shock 
Specialty: Gynaecology 
Code ruptured tubal pregnancy (O00.1)  as the “main condition”. O08.3 (Shock 
following abortion and ectopic and molar pr egnancy) may be used as an optional 
additional code. 
Example 20: Main condition: Incomplete abor tion with perforation of uterus 
Specialty: Gynaecology 
Code incomplete abortion with other and unspecified complications (O06.3) as the 
“main condition”. Code O08.6 (Damage to  pelvic organs and tissues following 
abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy) may be added as an optional additional 
code. 
Example 21: Main condition: Disseminated intravascular coagulation following abortion 
performed two days ago at another facility 
Specialty: Gynaecology 
Code delayed or excessive haemorrhage following abortion and ectopic and molar 
pregnancy (O08.1). No other code is required since the abortion was performed during 
a previous episode of care. 
O80-O84  Delivery 
Use of these codes to describe the “main cond ition” should be limited to cases where the only 
information recorded is a statement of delivery or the method of delivery. Codes O80-O84 may be 
used as optional additional codes to indicate a method or type of delivery where no separate data item 
or procedural classification is being used for this purpose. 
Example 22: Main condition: Pregnancy 
Other conditions: — 
Procedure: Low forceps delivery 
Code low forceps delivery (O81.0) as “main condition” since no other information is 
provided. 
Example 23: Main condition: Pregnancy delivered 
Other conditions: Failed trial of labour 
Procedure: Caesarean section 
Code failed trial of labour, unspecified (O 66.4) as the “main condition”. The code for 
caesarean section delivery, unspecified (O82.9), may be used as an optional additional 
code. 
Example 24: Main condition: Twin pregnancy delivered 
Other conditions: — 
Procedure: Spontaneous delivery 
Code twin pregnancy (O30.0) as the “main condition”. O84.0 (Multiple delivery, all 
spontaneous) may be added as an optional additional code. 

--- PAGE 94 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
88 
Example 25: Main condition: Term pregnancy delivered of dead fetus, 2800 g 
Other conditions: — 
Procedure: Spontaneous delivery 
Code to maternal care for intrauterine deat h (O36.4) if no specific reason for the fetal 
death can be determined. 
O98-O99 Maternal diseases classifiable elsewhere but complicating pregnancy, 
childbirth and the puerperium 
The subcategories provided should be used as “main condition” codes in preference to categories 
outside Chapter XV when the conditions being classi fied have been indicated by the health care 
practitioner to have complicated the pregnant state, to  have been aggravated by the pregnancy, or to 
have been the reason for obstetric care. The per tinent codes from other chapters may be used as 
optional additional codes to allow specification of the condition. 
Example 26: Main condition: Toxoplasmosis 
Other conditions: Pregnancy undelivered 
Specialty: High-risk antenatal clinic 
Code protozoal diseases complicating pre gnancy, childbirth and the puerperium 
(O98.6) as the main condition. B58.9 (Toxoplasmosis, unspecified) may be used as an 
optional additional code to identify the specific organism. 
Chapter XVIII: Symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not 
elsewhere classified 
Categories from this chapter should not be used as “main condition” codes unless the symptom, sign 
or abnormal finding was clearly the main condition treated or investigated during an episode of care 
and was unrelated to other conditions recorded by  the health care practitioner. See also Rule MB3 
(4.4.3) and the introduction to Chapter XVIII in Volume 1 for further information. 
Chapter XIX: Injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes 
Where multiple injuries are recorded and no one of  these has been selected as the “main condition”, 
code to one of the categories provided for statements of multiple injuries of: 
• same type to the same body region (usually fourth character .7 in categories S00-S99); 
• different types to the same body region (usually f ourth character .7 in the last category of each 
block, i.e. S09, S19, S29, etc.); and 
• same type to different body regions (T00-T05). 
Note the following exceptions: 
• for internal injuries recorded w ith superficial injuries and/or ope n wounds only, code to internal 
injuries as the “main condition”; 
• for fractures of skull and facial bones with associat ed intracranial injury, code to the intracranial 
injury as the “main condition”; 
• for intracranial haemorrhage record ed with other injuries to the h ead only, code to intracranial 
haemorrhage as the “main condition”; and 
• for fractures recorded with open wounds of the sam e location only, code to fracture as the “main 
condition”. 

--- PAGE 95 ---
RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY CODING 
89 
When the multiple injury categories are used, cod es for any individual injuries listed may be used as 
optional additional codes. In the case of the excepti ons mentioned, in addition to the main condition 
code, the associated injury may be identified either by an optional additional code or by one of the 
digits provided for this purpose. 
Example 27: Main condition: Injury of bladder and urethra 
Other conditions: — 
Code to injury of multiple pelvic orga ns (S37.7) as the “main condition”. S37.2 
(Injury of bladder) and S37.3 (Injury of ur ethra) may be used as optional additional 
codes. 
Example 28: Main condition: Open intracrania l wound with cerebellar haemorrhage 
Other conditions: — 
Code to traumatic cerebellar haemorrhag e (S06.8) as the “main condition”. The open 
intracranial wound may be indicated, if desired, by the addition of the code S01.9 
(Open wound of head, part unspecified) or by the addition of the digit 1 (with open 
intracranial wound) to code S06.8 (S06.8.1). 
T90-T98  Sequelae of injuries, of poisoning and of other consequences of external 
causes 
These codes are not to be used as the preferred codes for “main condition” if the nature of the residual 
conditions is recorded. When coding to the resi dual condition, T90-T98 may be used as optional 
additional codes. 
Chapter XX: External causes of morbidity and mortality  
These codes are not to be used as “main condition”  codes. They are intended for use as optional 
additional codes to identify the external cause of c onditions classified in Chapter XIX, and may also 
be used as optional additional codes with conditions  classified in any other chapter but having an 
external cause. 

--- PAGE 96 ---


--- PAGE 97 ---
 
91 
5. Statistical presentation 
5.1 Introduction 
This section presents the regulations regarding sta tistics for international comparison, and guidelines 
on data presentation in national and subnational statistical tables. 
Those responsible for the analysis of the data shoul d be involved in the development of the protocol 
for processing (including coding), not only of the dia gnostic data but also of the other items to be 
cross-tabulated with them. 
5.2 Source of data 
The medical certification of the cause of death is normally the responsibility of the attending 
physician. The medical certificate of cause of d eath should be in line with the international 
recommendation (see section 4.1.3). Administrative procedures should ensure the confidentiality of 
data from the death certificate or other medical records. 
In the case of deaths certified by coroners or othe r legal authorities, the medical evidence supplied to 
the certifier should be stated on the certificate in addition to any legal findings. 
5.3 Level of detail of cause in tabulations 
There are standard ways of listing causes coded according to the ICD, and there are formal 
recommendations concerning lists for tabulation pe rmitting international comparison (see section 5.6). 
In other tabulations, the hierarchical structure of the ICD allows considerable flexibility for possible 
groupings. 
The three- and four-character rubrics of the ICD allow for considerable detail. They are sometimes 
used to produce reference tables covering a whole range of data, which ma y not be published but 
retained in a central office where, on request, information can be extracted concerning specific 
diagnoses. The classification at this level is also used by specialists interested in the detailed study of a 
limited range of diagnoses. For these, more detail may be added at the fifth or even sixth character 
level, where coding has been done either to the suppl ementary characters given for some rubrics of the 
ICD or to one of the specialty-based adaptations of the family of classifications. 
Although every effort has been made to ensure that  the titles of ICD four-character subcategories are 
meaningful when they stand alone, they occasionally need to be read in conjunction with the three-
character category title. Where this is so, it is necessar y either to include the three-character rubrics 
(and their totals) or to use specially adapted titles fo r the four-character rubrics, which are intelligible 
when they stand alone. There are over 2000 rubrics at the three-character level, identifying all 
conditions likely to be of public health interest. 
There are also special tabulation lists in Volume 1 which are intended for circumstances in which the 
three-character list is too detailed, and are designe d so that international comparison of significant 
diseases and groups of diseases is not frustrated by diffe rent groupings having been used in different 
countries. 
5.4 The recommended special tabulation lists for mortality 
The special tabulation lists for mortality are given in Volume 1. 

--- PAGE 98 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
92 
5.4.1 The condensed lists 
The two condensed lists, List 1 and List 3, provide  items for each ICD chapter and also, within most 
chapters, identify the items of the selected lists t ogether with residual items entitled “Remainder of...”, 
which complete the coverage of the respective ch apter. They thus condense the full range of ICD 
three-character categories into a manageable number of items for many publication purposes. 
5.4.2 The selected lists 
The two selected lists, List 2 and List 4, contain items within most ICD chapters, for conditions and 
external causes significant for the monitoring and analysis of population health status and mortality-
related health concerns at both na tional and international levels. Ch apter totals are not provided and 
only a few chapters have residual rubrics that enable such totals to be obtained. 
5.4.3 Use of prefixes to identify the mortality lists 
Use of the numerical prefixes to the item numbers prevents confusion between the special tabulation 
lists where items for the same condition carry different numbers. (The item numbers can be 
distinguished from ICD four-character codes whic h have a letter in the first position.) Where an 
adapted list is used for national or subnational pur poses, an alternative identifying prefix should be 
used. 
5.4.4 Locally designed lists 
The four special tabulation lists provide for most countries an adequate source of information about 
the most important diseases and external causes of d eath. They also facilitate comparison over time 
and observation of shifts in the relative freque ncies of, for example, infectious diseases and 
degenerative diseases, as health programmes take effect. They permit comparison between subnational 
areas and population subgroups. In addition, they make  possible meaningful international comparisons 
of causes of death. 
When there is no need for international comparison, lists similar to the special tabulation lists can be 
designed for use locally. The ICD rubrics of such lis ts can be selected and grouped in whatever way is 
most appropriate and useful. Special lists would be  needed, for example, for monitoring the progress, 
in terms of morbidity and mortality, of many local health programmes. 
When adapting the special tabulation lists to nationa l requirements, or when a tabulation list is being 
devised for a new or special project, it is helpful to have a test run, simply counting the number of 
cases falling into each three-character category, to determine for which conditions grouping to broad 
rubrics is appropriate and where the use of subcategories could be necessary. 
Where a local list is constructed, the key to the c ondensed categories should contain the three (or four) 
character codes of the core classification. 
5.5 The special tabulation list for morbidity 
5.5.1 Description 
The tabulation list for morbidity contains 298 detaile d items. The morbidity list is a condensed list in 
which each category is included only once and totals  for groups of diseases and ICD chapters can be 
obtained by the addition of sequential items. 
The morbidity list is intended as a basis for nationa l lists and for intercountry comparison. National 
lists can be constructed by eith er condensing or expanding the core  classification as appropriate. The 
list is suitable for data on inpatient care and, with  suitable adaptation - notably aggregation of some 
items and expansion of items rela ting to Chapter XVIII (Symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and 
laboratory findings) and Chapter XXI (Factors influe ncing health status and contact with health 
services) - for information from other sources, such as ambulatory care and surveys. When a local list 

--- PAGE 99 ---
STATISTICAL PRESENTATION 
93 
is constructed, the key to the condensed categori es should contain the three (or four) character codes 
of the core classification. 
The morbidity list includes the code numbers of aster isk categories for use when the asterisk code for 
dual classification is included in the analysis.  The list can be used for either dagger-based or asterisk-
based tabulations and it is important, therefore, to indicate in each table which basis has been used. 
5.5.2 Modification of the special tabulation list for morbidity according to national 
requirements 
If, after examination of the frequencies of the IC D three-character rubrics, it is felt necessary to 
expand the list, some of the items for a range of  ICD categories can be subdivided according to the 
core classification or even to the four-character le vel. If the recommended list is considered to be too 
detailed or if a shorter list is required, selecti on can be made based on national or local health 
concerns. Depending on a country’s “epidemiological pr ofile”, categories may be combined to shorten 
the list. 

--- PAGE 100 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
94 
 
5.6 Recommendations in relation to statisti cal tables for international comparison 
5.6.1 Statistical tables 
The degree of detail in cross-classification by cau se, sex, age, and geographical area will depend both 
on the purpose and range of the statistics and on the practical limits to their tabulation. The following 
patterns, which are designed to promote intern ational compatibility, present standard ways of 
expressing various characteristics. Where a different classification is used in published tables (e.g. in 
age-grouping), it should be reducible to one of the recommended groupings. 
 (a) Analysis by the International Classificati on of Diseases should, as appropriate, be in accordance 
with: 
(i) the detailed list of three-character categories, with or without four-character subcategories; 
(ii) one of the special tabulation lists for mortality; 
(iii) the special tabulation list for morbidity. 
(b) Age classification for general purposes: 
(i) under 1 year, single years to 4 years, 5-year groups from 5 to 84 years, 85 years and over; 
(ii) under 1 year, 1-4 years, 5-14 years, 15-24 years, 25-34 years, 35-44 years, 45-54 years, 55-
64 years, 65-74 years, 75 years and over. 
(iii) under 1 year, 1-14 years, 15-44 years, 45-64 years, 65 years and over. 
(c) Classification by area should, as appropriate, be in accordance with: 
(i) each major civil division; 
(ii) each town or conurbation of 1
 000 000 population and over, otherwise the largest town with 
a population of at least 100 000; 
(iii) a national aggregate of urba n areas of 100 000 population and over; 
(iv) a national aggregate of urban areas of less than 100 000 population; 
(v) a national aggregate of rural areas. 
Note 1. Statistics relating to (c) should include the definitions of urban and rural used. 
Note 2. In countries where medical certification of the cause of death is incomplete or limited to 
certain areas, figures for deaths not medically certified should be published separately. 
5.6.2 Tabulation of causes of death 
Statistics of causes of death for a defined area should be in accordance with recommendation (a)(i) 
above, or, if this is not possible, with recommenda tion (a)(ii). Deaths should preferably be classified 
by sex and age group as in recommendation (b)(i). 
Statistics of causes of deaths for the areas in recommendation (c) should comply with recommendation 
(a)(ii), or if this is not possible, with recommenda tion (a)(iii). They should preferably be tabulated by 
sex and age group as in recommendation (b)(ii). 
 
5.7 Standards and reporting requirements re lated to fetal, perinatal, neonatal and 
infant mortality 
The following definitions have been adopted by the World Health Assembly in relation both to 
statistics amenable to international comparison a nd to reporting requirements for the data from which 
they are derived. The definitions adopted by th e Health Assembly appear in Volume 1 and, for 
convenience, are restated below. 

--- PAGE 101 ---
STATISTICAL PRESENTATION 
95 
5.7.1 Definitions  
Live birth 
Live birth is the complete expulsion or extrac tion from its mother of a product of conception, 
irrespective of the duration of the pregnancy, which, after such separation, breathes or shows any other 
evidence of life, such as beating of the heart, pulsati on of the umbilical cord, or definite movement of 
voluntary muscles, whether or not the umbilical cord  has been cut or the pl acenta is attached; each 
product of such a birth is considered liveborn. 
Fetal death [deadborn fetus] 
Fetal death is death prior to the complete expul sion or extraction from its mother of a product of 
conception, irrespective of the duration of pregnancy; the death is indicated by the fact that after such 
separation the fetus does not breathe or show any othe r evidence of life, such as beating of the heart, 
pulsation of the umbilical cord, or definite movement of voluntary muscles. 
Birth weight 
The first weight of the fetus or newborn obtained after birth. 
For live births, birth weight should preferably be  measured within the first hour of life before 
significant postnatal weight loss has occurred. While statistical tabulations include 500 g groupings for 
birth weight, weights should not be recorded in t hose groupings. The actual weight should be recorded 
to the degree of accuracy to which it is measured. 
The definitions of “low”, “very low”, and “extrem ely low” birth weight do not constitute mutually 
exclusive categories. Below the set limits they ar e all-inclusive and therefore overlap (i.e. “low” 
includes “very low” and “extremely low”, while “very low” includes “extremely low”). 
Low birth weight 
Less than 2500 g (up to and including 2499 g). 
Very low birth weight 
Less than 1500 g (up to and including 1499 g). 
Extremely low birth weight 
Less than 1000 g (up to and including 999 g). 
Gestational age 
The duration of gestation is measured from the fi rst day of the last normal menstrual period. 
Gestational age is expressed in completed days or  completed weeks (e.g. events occurring 280 to 286 
completed days after the onset of the last normal me nstrual period are considered to have occurred at 
40 weeks of gestation). 
Gestational age is frequently a source of confusion,  when calculations are based on menstrual dates. 
For the purposes of calculation of gestational age fro m the date of the first day of the last normal 
menstrual period and the date of de livery, it should be borne in mind th at the first day is day zero and 
not day one; days 0-6 therefore correspond to “comp leted week zero”; days 7-13 to “completed week 
one”; and the 40th week of actual gestation is sy nonymous with “completed week 39”. Where the date 
of the last normal menstrual period is not available, gestational age should be based on the best clinical 
estimate. In order to avoid misunderstanding, tabulations should indicate both weeks and days. 
Pre-term 
Less than 37 completed weeks (less than 259 days) of gestation. 
Term 
From 37 completed weeks to less than 42 completed weeks (259 to 293 days) of gestation. 
Post-term 
42 completed weeks or more (294 days or more) of gestation. 
Perinatal period 
The perinatal period commences at 22 completed week s (154 days) of gestation (the time when birth 
weight is normally 500 g), and ends seven completed days after birth. 

--- PAGE 102 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
96 
Neonatal period 
The neonatal period commences at birth and ends 28 completed days after birth. Neonatal deaths 
(deaths among live births during the first 28 complete d days of life) may be subdivided into early 
neonatal deaths, occurring during the first seven days of life, and late neonatal deaths, occurring after 
the seventh day but before 28 completed days of life. 
Age at death during the first day of life (day zero) should be recorded in units of completed minutes or 
hours of life. For the second (day 1), third (day 2) and through 27 completed days of life, age at death 
should be recorded in days. 
5.7.2 Reporting criteria 
The legal requirements for the registration of fetal d eaths and live births vary from country to country 
and even within countries. If possible, all fetuses and infants weighing at least 500 g at birth, whether 
alive or dead, should be included in the statistics. When information on birth weight is unavailable, the 
corresponding criteria for gestational age (22 comple ted weeks) or body length (25 cm crown-heel) 
should be used. The criteria for deciding whether an  event has taken place within the perinatal period 
should be applied in the order: (1) birth weight, (2) gestational age, (3) crown-heel length. The 
inclusion of fetuses and infants weighing betw een 500 g and 1000 g in national statistics is 
recommended both because of its inherent value and because it improves the coverage of reporting at 
1000 g and over. 
5.7.3 Statistics for international comparison 
In statistics for international comparison, inclusion of the extremely low-birth-weight group disrupts 
the validity of comparisons and is not recomme nded. Countries should a rrange registration and 
reporting procedures so that the events and the criteri a for their inclusion in the statistics can be easily 
identified. Less mature fetuses and infants not co rresponding to these criteria (i.e. weighing less than 
1000 g) should be excluded from perina tal statistics unless there are legal or other valid reasons to the 
contrary, in which case their inclusion must be exp licitly stated. Where birth weight, gestational age 
and crown-heel length are not known, the event s hould be included in, rather than excluded from, 
mortality statistics of the perinatal period. Count ries should also present statistics in which both the 
numerator and the denominator of all ratios and ra tes are restricted to fetuses and infants weighing 
1000 g or more (weight-specific ratios and rates); wher e information on birth weight is not available, 
the corresponding gestational age (28 completed week s) or body length (35 cm crown-heel) should be 
used. 
In reporting fetal, perinatal, ne onatal and infant mortality statis tics the number of deaths due to 
malformations should whenever possible be identified fo r live births and fetal deaths and in relation to 
birth weights of 500-999 g and 1000 g or more. Neona tal deaths due to malformations should be 
subdivided into early and late neonatal deaths. This informati on enables perinatal and neonatal 
mortality statistics to be reported with or without the deaths from malformations. 

--- PAGE 103 ---
STATISTICAL PRESENTATION 
97 
 
Ratios and rates 
Published ratios and rates should always specify the de nominator, i.e. live births or total births (live 
births plus fetal deaths). Countries are encouraged to provide the ratios and rates listed below, or as 
many of them as their data collection systems permit. 
Fetal death ratio 
Fetal deaths x 1000 
Live births 
Fetal death rate 
Fetal deaths x 1000 
Total births 
Fetal death rate, weight-specific 
Fetal deaths weighing 1000 g and over  x 1000 
Total births weighing 1000 g and over 
Early neonatal mortality rate 
Early neonatal deaths 
x 1000
 
Live births 
Early neonatal mortality rate, weight-specific 
Early neonatal deaths of infants weighing 1000 g and over at birth 
x 1000
 
Live births weighing 1000 g and over 
Perinatal mortality ratio 
Fetal deaths and early neonatal deaths 
x 1000
 
Live births 
Perinatal mortality rate 
Fetal deaths and early neonatal deaths 
x 1000
 
Total births 
The perinatal mortality rate is the number of deaths  of fetuses weighing at least 500 g (or, when birth 
weight is unavailable, after 22 completed weeks of g estation or with a crown-heel length of 25 cm or 
more), plus the number of early neonatal deaths , per 1000 total births. Because of the different 
denominators in each component, this is not necessarily equal to the sum of the fetal death rate and the 
early neonatal mortality rate. 
Perinatal mortality rate, weight-specific 
Fetal deaths weighing 1000 g and over, plus 
early neonatal deaths of infants weighing 1000 g and over at birth 
x 1000
 
Total births weighing 1000 g and over 
Neonatal mortality rate 
Neonatal deaths 
 x 1000
 
Live births 

--- PAGE 104 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
98 
 
Neonatal mortality rate, weight-specific 
Neonatal deaths of infants weighing 1000 g and over at birth 
 x 1000
 
Live births weighing 1000 g and over 
Infant mortality rate 
Deaths under one year of age 
 x 1000
 
Live births 
Infant mortality rate, weight-specific 
Infant deaths among live births weighing 1000 g and over at birth 
 x 1000
 
Live births weighing 1000 g and over 
5.7.4 Presentation of causes of perinatal mortality 
For statistics of perinatal mortality derived from the form of certificate recommended for this purpose 
(see section 4.3.1), full-scale multiple-cause analysis of all conditions reported will be of greatest 
benefit. Where such analysis is impracticable, anal ysis of the main disease or condition in the fetus or 
infant (part (a)) and of the main maternal condition affecting the fetus or infant (part (c)) with cross-
tabulation of groups of these two conditions should be regarded as the minimum. Where it is necessary 
to select only one condition (for example, when early  neonatal deaths must be incorporated into 
single-cause tables of deaths at all ages), the main disease or condition in the fetus or infant (part (a)) 
should be selected. 
Age classification for special statistics of infant mortality 
(i) By single days for the first week of life (under 24 hours, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 days),  7-13 days, 14-
20 days, 21-27 days, 28 days and up to, but not in cluding, 2 months, by single months of life 
from 2 months to 1 year (2, 3, 4 ... 11 months). 
(ii) Under 24 hours, 1-6 days, 7-27 days, 28 days up to, but not including, 3 months, 3-5 months, 
6 months but under 1 year. 
(iii) Under 7 days, 7-27 days, 28 days but under 1 year. 
Age classification for early neonatal deaths 
(i) Under 1 hour, 1-11 hours, 12-23 hours,  24-47 hours, 48-71 hours, 72-167 hours; 
(ii) Under 1 hour, 1-23 hours, 24-167 hours. 
Birth weight classification for perinatal mortality statistics 
By weight intervals of 500 g, i.e. 1000-1499 g, etc. 
Gestational age classification for perinatal mortality statistics 
Under 28 weeks (under 196 days), 28-31 weeks ( 196-223 days), 32-36 weeks (224-258 days), 37-41 
weeks (259-293 days), 42 weeks and over (294 days and over). 
5.8 Standards and reporting requirements related to maternal mortality 
5.8.1 Definitions 
Maternal death 
A maternal death is the death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of 
pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and the site  of the pregnancy, from any cause related to or 
aggravated by the pregnancy or its management, but not from accidental or incidental causes. 

--- PAGE 105 ---
STATISTICAL PRESENTATION 
99 
Late maternal death 
A late maternal death is the death of a woman fro m direct or indirect obstetric causes more than 42 
days but less than one year after termination of pregnancy. 
Pregnancy-related death 
A pregnancy-related death is the death of a woman wh ile pregnant or within 42 days of termination of 
pregnancy, irrespective of the cause of death. 
Maternal deaths should be subdivided into two groups: 
Direct obstetric deaths:   those resulting from obstetric complications of the pregnant state 
(pregnancy, labour and puerperium), from interven tions, omissions, incorrect treatment, or from a 
chain of events resulting from any of the above. 
Indirect obstetric deaths:   those resulting from previous existing disease or disease that developed 
during pregnancy and which was not due to direct  obstetric causes, but which was aggravated by 
physiologic effects of pregnancy. 
In order to improve the quality of maternal mort ality data and provide alternative methods of 
collecting data on deaths during pr egnancy or related to it, as well as to encourage the recording of 
deaths from obstetric causes occurring more than 42 days following termination of pregnancy, the 
Forty-third World Health Assembly in 1990 adopted the recommendation that countries consider the 
inclusion on death certificates of questions regard ing current pregnancy a nd pregnancy within one 
year preceding death. 
5.8.2 International reporting 
For the purpose of the international reporting of maternal mortality, only those maternal deaths 
occurring before the end of the 42-day reference pe riod should be included in the calculation of the 
various ratios and rates, although the recording of later deaths is useful for national analytical 
purposes. 
5.8.3 Published maternal mortality rates 
Published maternal mortality rates should always specify the numerator (number of recorded maternal 
deaths), which can be given as: 
• the number of recorded direct obstetric deaths, or 
• the number of recorded obstetric deaths (direct plus indirect). 
It should be noted that maternal deaths from HI V disease (B20-B24) and obstetrical tetanus (A34) are 
coded to Chapter I. Care must be taken to include such cases in the maternal mortality rate. 
5.8.4 Denominators for maternal mortality 
The denominator used for calculating maternal mort ality should be specified as either the number of 
live births or the number of total births (live birt hs plus fetal deaths). Where both denominators are 
available, a calculation should be published for each. 
Ratios and rates 
Results should be expressed as a ratio of the numerat or to the denominator, multiplied by k (where k 
may be 1000, 10 000 or 100 000, as preferred and indicat ed by the country). Maternal mortality ratios 
and rates can thus be expressed as follows: 

--- PAGE 106 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
100 
Maternal mortality rate1 
Maternal deaths (direct and indirect) 
 x  k
 
Live births 
Direct obstetric mortality ratio 
Direct obstetric deaths only 
 x  k 
Live births 
Pregnancy-related mortality ratio 
Pregnancy-related deaths 
 x  k
 
Live births 
5.9 Proportion of deaths classified to ill-defined causes 
The allocation of a high proportion of causes of death to Chapter XVIII  (Symptoms, signs, and 
abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified) indicates a need to check or 
estimate the quality of the tabulated data allocated to more specific causes assigned to other chapters. 
5.10 Morbidity 
There are a wide variety of possible sources of in formation on morbidity. The data most suitable for 
analysis on a national or regional basis are those th at enable some calculation to be made of the 
incidence of diseases, or at least of those diseases coming, for example, under medical or hospital care. 
It is primarily for data on episodes of health care that the formally agreed guidelines and definitions 
for recording causes of morbidity and selection of a single condition, where appropriate, are intended. 
Other types of data require the development of local rules. 
The problems of morbidity statistics start with the ve ry definition of “morbidity”. There is much scope 
for improving morbidity statistics. International compar isons of morbidity data are, at present, feasible 
only to a very limited extent and for clearly de fined purposes. National or regional information on 
morbidity has to be interpreted in relation to its source and with backgr ound knowledge of the quality 
of the data, diagnostic reliability, and demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. 
5.11 Precautions needed when tabulat ion lists include subtotals 
It may not always be apparent to those processing the data that some of the items in the tabulation lists 
are in fact subtotals; for instance, titles of blocks and, in the case of the four-character list of ICD-10, 
titles of three-character categories, as well as the items  for chapter titles in the condensed versions of 
the mortality tabulation lists. These entries should be  ignored when totals are calculated, otherwise 
cases would be counted more than once. 
5.12 Problems of a small population 
Population size is one of the factors that has to be considered when the health status of a population is 
assessed by means of mortality or morbidity data. In countries with small populations, the annual 
numbers of events in many categories of the short lists will be very small, and will fluctuate randomly 
from year to year. This is especially so for separate age groups and sexes. The problems can be 
alleviated by one or more of the following measures: 
• use or presentation of broad groupings of ICD rubrics, such as chapters; 
                                                      
1 The use of the term “rate”, although inexact in this context, is retained for the sake of continuity. 

--- PAGE 107 ---
STATISTICAL PRESENTATION 
101 
• aggregation of data over a longer period, e.g. to take the preceding two years’ data together with 
those for the current year and produce a “moving average” figure; 
• using the broadest of the age groupings recommended at 5.6.1 and 5.7.4. 
What applies for small national populations also hol ds true in general for subnational segments of 
larger populations. Investigations of health i ssues in population subgroups have to take into 
consideration the effect of the size of each of the s ubgroups on the type of analysis used. This need is 
generally recognized when dealing with sample surv eys, but often overlooked when the investigation 
concerns the health problems of special groups in the national population. 
5.13 “Empty cells” and cells with low frequencies 
Whatever list of causes is being used, it may be  found that no cases occur in certain cells of a 
statistical table. Where there are many empty lines in a table, it is worth considering the omission of 
such lines from a published table or from a comput er printout. When only the occasional case of a 
disease occurs in a country, the line can be regularly omitted from the published table and a footnote 
added to indicate either that there were no cases or , when sporadic cases do occur, in which cell the 
case would have appeared. 
For cells with very low frequencies, especially tho se relating to diseases that would not be expected to 
occur, it is important to establish that the cases existed and did not result from a coding or processing 
error. This should be carried out as part of the general quality control of the data. 

--- PAGE 108 ---


--- PAGE 109 ---
 
103 
6. History of the development of the ICD 1  
6.1 Early history 
Sir George Knibbs, the eminent Australian statis tician, credited François Bossier de Lacroix 
(1706-1777), better known as Sauvages, with the first attempt to classify diseases systematically ( 10). 
Sauvages’ comprehensive treatise was published under the title Nosologia methodica. A contemporary 
of Sauvages was the great methodologist Linnaeus (1707-1778), one of whose treatises was entitled 
Genera morborum. At the beginning of the 19th century, the classification of disease in most general 
use was one by William Cullen (1710-1790), of Ed inburgh, which was published in 1785 under the 
title Synopsis nosologiae methodicae. 
For all practical purposes, however, the statistical  study of disease began a century earlier with the 
work of John Graunt on the London Bills of Morta lity. The kind of classification envisaged by this 
pioneer is exemplified by his attempt to estimate the proportion of liveborn children who died before 
reaching the age of six years, no records of age at death being available. He took all deaths classed as 
thrush, convulsions, rickets, teeth and worms, abortiv es, chrysomes, infants, livergrown, and overlaid 
and added to them half the deaths classed as smallpox, swinepox, measles, and worms without 
convulsions.Despite the crudity of this classification hi s estimate of a 36% mortality before the age of 
six years appears from later evidence to have been  a good one. While three centuries have contributed 
something to the scientific accuracy of disease classi fication, there are many who doubt the usefulness 
of attempts to compile statistics of disease, or even causes of death, becau se of the difficulties of 
classification. To these, one can quote Major Greenwood: “The scientific purist, who will wait for 
medical statistics until they are nosologically exact, is no wiser than Horace’s rustic waiting for the 
river to flow away” (11). 
Fortunately for the progress of preventive medicine , the General Register Office of England and 
Wales, at its inception in 1837, found in William Fa rr (1807-1883) - its first medical statistician - a 
man who not only made the best possible use of the imperfect classifications of disease available at the 
time, but laboured to secure better classifications and international uniformity in their use. 
Farr found the classification of Cullen in use in the public services of his day. It had not been revised 
to embody the advances of medical science, nor was it deemed by him to be satisfactory for statistical 
purposes. In the first Annual Report of the Registrar General ( 12), therefore, he discussed the 
principles that should govern a statistical classification of disease and urged the adoption of a uniform 
classification as follows: 
The advantages of a uniform statistical nomenclature, however imperfect, are so obvious, that it is 
surprising no attention has been paid to its enforcement in Bills of Mortality. Each disease has, in many 
instances, been denoted by three or four terms, a nd each term has been applied to as many different 
diseases: vague, inconvenient names have been employed , or complications have been registered instead 
of primary diseases. The nomenclature is of as much importance in this department of inquiry as weights 
and measures in the physical sciences, and should be settled without delay. 
Both nomenclature and statistical classification recei ved constant study and c onsideration by Farr in 
his annual “Letters” to the Registrar General published in the Annual Reports of the Registrar General. 
                                                      
1 Most of the material presented in sections 6.1-6.3 is reprodu ced from the Introduction to the Seventh Revision of the ICD, which gives an 
excellent description of the early history of the classification. 

--- PAGE 110 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
104 
The utility of a uniform classification of causes of death was so strongly recognized at the first 
International Statistical Congress, held in Bru ssels in 1853, that the Congress requested William Farr 
and Marc d’Espine, of Geneva, to prepare an in ternationally applicable, uniform classification of 
causes of death. At the next Congress, in Paris in  1855, Farr and d’Espine submitted two separate lists 
which were based on very different principles. Farr’s classification was arranged under five groups: 
epidemic diseases, constitutional (general) diseases, local diseases arranged according to anatomical 
site, developmental diseases, and diseases that are the direct result of violence. D’Espine classified 
diseases according to their nature (gouty, herpe tic, haematic, etc.). The Congress adopted a 
compromise list of 139 rubrics. In 1864, this classifi cation was revised in Paris on the basis of Farr’s 
model and was subsequently further revised in  1874, 1880, and 1886. Although this classification was 
never universally accepted, the ge neral arrangement proposed by Farr, including the principle of 
classifying diseases by anatomical site, survived as th e basis of the International List of Causes of 
Death. 
6.2 Adoption of the International  List of Causes of Death 
The International Statistical Institute, the successor to the International Statistical Congress, at its 
meeting in Vienna in 1891, charged a committee,  chaired by Jacques Bertillon (1851-1922), Chief of 
Statistical Services of the City of Paris, with the pr eparation of a classification of causes of death. It is 
of interest to note that Bertillon was the grandson of  Achille Guillard, a noted botanist and statistician, 
who had introduced the resolution requesting Farr and d’Espine to prepare a uniform classification at 
the first International Statistical Congress in 1853. The report of this committee was presented by 
Bertillon at the meeting of the International Statisti cal Institute in Chicago in 1893 and adopted by it. 
The classification prepared by Bertillon’s committee was based on the classification of causes of death 
used by the City of Paris, which, since its re vision in 1885, represented a synthesis of English, 
German, and Swiss classifications. The classification was based on the principle, adopted by Farr, of 
distinguishing between general diseases and those localized  to a particular organ or anatomical site. In 
accordance with the instructions of the Vienna C ongress made at the suggestion of L. Guillaume, the 
Director of the Federal Bureau of Statistics of Switzerland, Bertillon included three classifications: the 
first, an abridged classification of 44 titles; the second, a classification of 99 titles; and the third, a 
classification of 161 titles. 
The Bertillon Classification of Causes of Death, as it was first called, recei ved general approval and 
was adopted by several countries, as well as by many cities. The classification was first used in North 
America by Jesus E. Monjaras for the statistics of San Luis de Potosi, Mexico ( 13). In 1898, the 
American Public Health Association, at its mee ting in Ottawa, Canada, r ecommended the adoption of 
the Bertillon Classification by registrars of Canada , Mexico, and the United States of America. The 
Association further suggested that the classification should be revised every ten years. 
At the meeting of the International Statistical In stitute at Christiania in 1899,  Bertillon presented a 
report on the progress of the classification, including the recommendations of the American Public 
Health Association for decennial revisions. The Inte rnational Statistical Institute then adopted the 
following resolution (14): 
The International Statistical Institu te, convinced of the necessity of using in the diffe rent countries 
comparable nomenclatures: 
Learns with pleasure of the adoption by all the statistical offices of North America, by some of those of 
South America, and by some in Europe, of the system of cause of death nomenclature presented in 1893; 
Insists vigorously that this system of nomenclature be adopted in principle and without revision, by all 
the statistical institutions of Europe; 
Approves, at least in its general lines, the system of decennial revision proposed by the American Public 
Health Association at its Ottawa session (1898): 
Urges the statistical offices who have not yet adhered,  to do so without delay, and to contribute to the 
comparability of the cause of death nomenclature. 
The French Government therefore convoked in Pa ris, in August 1900, the first International 
Conference for the Revision of the Bertillon or Intern ational List of Causes of Death. Delegates from 

--- PAGE 111 ---
HISTORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ICD 
105 
26 countries attended this Conference. A detailed classification of causes of death consisting of 179 
groups and an abridged classification of 35 groups were adopted on 21 August 1900. The desirability 
of decennial revisions was recognized, and the Fren ch Government was requested to call the next 
meeting in 1910. In fact the next conference was held in 1909, and the Government of France called 
succeeding conferences in 1920, 1929, and 1938. 
Bertillon continued to be the guiding force in the pr omotion of the International List of Causes of 
Death, and the revisions of 1900, 1910, and 1920 were carried out under his leadership. As 
Secretary-General of the International Conferen ce, he sent out the provisional revision for 1920 to 
more than 500 people, asking for comments. His death in 1922 left the International Conference 
without a guiding hand. 
At the 1923 session of the International Statistical Institute, Michel Huber, Bertillon’s successor in 
France, recognized this lack of leadership and intr oduced a resolution for the International Statistical 
Institute to renew its stand of 1893 in regard to th e International Classification of Causes of Death and 
to cooperate with other international organizations in preparation for subsequent revisions. The Health 
Organization of the League of Nations had also taken an active interest in vital statistics and appointed 
a Commission of Statistical Experts to study the classification of diseases and causes of death, as well 
as other problems in the field of medical statistics. E. Roesle, Chief of the Medical Statistical Service 
of the German Health Bureau and a member of the Commission of Expert Statisticians, prepared a 
monograph that listed the expansion in the rubrics of the 1920 International List of Causes of Death 
that would be required if the classification was to be  used in the tabulation of statistics of morbidity. 
This careful study was published by the Health Organization of the League of Nations in 1928 ( 15). In 
order to coordinate the work of both agencies,  an international commission, known as the “Mixed 
Commission”, was created with an equal number of representatives from the International Statistical 
Institute and the Health Organization of the League of Nations. This Commission drafted the 
proposals for the Fourth (1929) and the Fifth (1938) re visions of the International List of Causes of 
Death. 
6.3 The Fifth Decennial Revision Conference 
The Fifth International Conference for the Revision of  the International List of Causes of Death, like 
the preceding conferences, was convened by the Gove rnment of France and was held in Paris in 
October 1938. The Conference approved three lists: a de tailed list of 200 titles, an intermediate list of 
87 titles and an abridged list of 44 titles. Apart from bringing the lists up to date in accordance with 
the progress of science, particularly in the chapter on infectious and parasitic diseases, and changes in 
the chapters on puerperal conditions and on acci dents, the Conference made as few changes as 
possible in the contents, number, and even in the numbering of the items. A list of causes of stillbirth 
was also drawn up and approved by the Conference. 
As regards classification of diseases for morbidity st atistics, the Conference recognized the growing 
need for a corresponding list of diseases to meet the statistical requirements of widely differing 
organizations, such as health insurance organiza tions, hospitals, military medical services, health 
administrations, and similar bodies. The following resolution, therefore, was adopted (16): 
2. International Lists of Diseases. 
In view of the importance of the compilation of international lists of diseases corresponding to the 
international lists of causes of death: 
The Conference recommends that th e Joint Committee appointed by th e International Institute of 
Statistics and the Health Organization of the League of Nations undertake, as in 1929, the preparation of 
international lists of diseases, in conjunction with  experts and representatives of the organizations 
specially concerned. 

--- PAGE 112 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
106 
Pending the compilation of international lists of diseases, the Conference recommends that the various 
national lists in use should, as far as possible, be br ought into line with the detailed International List of 
Causes of Death (the numbers of the chapters, headi ngs and subheadings in the said List being given in 
brackets). 
The Conference further recommended that the United States Government continue its studies of the 
statistical treatment of joint causes of death in the following resolution (16): 
3. Death Certificate and Selection of Causes of Death where more than One Cause is 
given (Joint Causes) 
The Conference, 
Whereas, in 1929, the United States Government was good enough to undertake the study of the means 
of unifying the methods of selection of the main cause of death to be tabulated in those cases where two 
or more causes are mentioned on the death certificate, 
And whereas, the numerous surveys completed or in the course of preparation in several countries reveal 
the importance of this problem, which has not yet been solved,  
And whereas, according to these surv eys, the international comparability of death rates from the various 
diseases requires, not only the solution of the problem of the selection of the main tabulated cause of 
death, but also the solution of a number of other questions; 
(1)  Warmly thanks the United States Government fo r the work it has accomplished or promoted in this 
connection; 
(2)  Requests the United States Government to continue its investigations during the next ten years, in 
co-operation with other countries and organizations, on a slightly wider basis, and 
(3)  Suggests that, for these future investigations, the United States Government should set up a 
subcommittee comprising representatives of count ries and organizations participating in the 
investigations undertaken in this connection. 
6.4 Previous classifications of diseases for morbidity statistics 
In the discussion so far, classification of disease h as been presented almost wholly in relation to 
cause-of-death statistics. Farr, however, recognized that it was desirable “to extend the same system of 
nomenclature to diseases which, though not fatal, cause disability in the population, and now figure in 
the tables of the diseases of armies, navies, hospitals , prisons, lunatic asylums, public institutions of 
every kind, and sickness societies, as well as in the census of countries like Ireland, where the diseases 
of all the people are enumerated” ( 9). In his Report on nomenclature and statistical classification of 
diseases, presented to the Second International Statis tical Congress, he therefore included in the 
general list of diseases most of those diseases that aff ect health as well as diseases that are fatal. At the 
Fourth International Statistical Congress, held in London in 1860, Florence Nightingale urged the 
adoption of Farr’s classification of diseases for the tabulation of hospital morbidity in the paper, 
Proposals for a uniform plan of hospital statistics. 
At the First International Conference to revise the Bertillon Classification of Causes of Death in Paris 
in 1900, a parallel classification of diseases for use in statistics of sickness was adopted. A parallel list 
was also adopted at the second conference in 1909.  The extra categories for non-fatal diseases were 
formed by subdivision of certain rubrics of the cause-of-death classification into two or three disease 
groups, each of these being designated by a letter. Th e translation in English of the Second Decennial 
Revision, published by the United States Departme nt of Commerce and Labor in 1910, was entitled 
International Classification of Causes of Sickness and Death . 

--- PAGE 113 ---
HISTORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ICD 
107 
Later revisions incorporated some of the groups into the detailed International List of Causes of Death. 
The Fourth International Conference adopted a classification of illness which differed from the 
detailed International List of Causes of Death only by the addition of further subdivisions of 12 titles. 
These international classifications of illnesses, however , failed to receive general acceptance, as they 
provided only a limited expansion of the basic cause-of-death list. 
In the absence of a uniform classification of diseases that  could be used satisfactorily for statistics of 
illness, many countries found it necessary to prepare their own  lists. A Standard Morbidity Code was 
prepared by the Dominion Council of Health of Ca nada and published in 1936. The main subdivisions 
of this code represented the eighteen chapters of the 1929 Revision of the International List of Causes 
of Death, and these were subdivided into some 380 specific disease categories. At the Fifth 
International Conference in 1938, the Canadian dele gate introduced a modification of this list for 
consideration as the basis for an international list of causes of illness. Although no action was taken on 
this proposal, the Conference adopted the resolution quoted above. 
In 1944, provisional classifications of diseases a nd injuries were published in both the United 
Kingdom and the United States of America for use in  the tabulation of morbidity statistics. Both 
classifications were more extensive than the Canadi an list, but, like it, followed the general order of 
diseases in the International List of Causes of Deat h. The British classification was prepared by the 
Committee on Hospital Morbidity Statistics of the Medical Research Council, which was created in 
January 1942. It is entitled A provisional classification of diseases and injuries for use in compiling 
morbidity statistics (17). It was prepared with the purpose of providing a scheme for collecting and 
recording statistics of patients admitted to hos pitals in the United Kingdom, using a standard 
classification of diseases and injuries, and was used throughout the country by governmental and other 
agencies. 
A few years earlier, in August 1940, the Surgeon-Gene ral of the United States Public Health Service 
and the Director of the United States Bureau of the Census published a list of diseases and injuries for 
tabulation of morbidity statistics ( 18). The code was prepared by the Division of Public Health 
Methods of the Public Health Service in cooperati on with a committee of consultants appointed by the 
Surgeon-General. The Manual for coding causes of illness according to a diagnosis code for 
tabulating morbidity statistics , consisting of the diagnosis code, a tabular list of inclusions, and an 
alphabetical index, was published in 1944. The code was used in several hospitals, in a large number 
of voluntary hospital insurance plans and medical car e plans, and in special studies by other agencies 
in the United States. 
6.5 United States Committee on Joint Causes of Death 
In compliance with the resolution of the Fifth Inte rnational Conference, the American Secretary of 
State in 1945 appointed the United States Committee on Joint Causes of Death under the chairmanship 
of Lowell J. Reed, Professor of Biostatistics at Johns  Hopkins University. Members and consultants of 
this committee included representatives of the Gove rnments of Canada and the United Kingdom and 
the Health Section of the League of Nations. Th e committee recognized the general trend of thought 
with regard to lists of morbidity and mortality st atistics, and decided that, before taking up the matter 
of joint causes, it would be advantageous to cons ider classifications from the point of view of 
morbidity and mortality, since the problem of joint causes pertained to both types of statistics. 
The committee also took into account that part of the resolution on International Lists of Diseases of 
the previous International Conference recommending th at the “various national lists in use should, as 
far as possible, be brought into line with the deta iled International List of Causes of Death”. It 
recognized that the classification of sickness and in jury is closely linked with the classification of 
causes of death. The view that such lists are funda mentally different arises from the erroneous belief 
that the International List is a classification of terminal causes, whereas it is in fact based upon the 
morbid condition that initiated the train of events ultimately resulting in death.  

--- PAGE 114 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
108 
The committee believed that, in order to utilize fully both morbidity and mortality statistics, not only 
should the classification of diseases for both purposes be comparable, but if possible there should be a 
single list. 
Furthermore, an increasing number of statistical or ganizations were using medical records involving 
both sickness and death. Even in organizations that  compile only morbidity statistics, fatal as well as 
non-fatal cases must be coded. A single list, therefor e, greatly facilitates their coding operations. It 
also provides a common base for comparison of morbidity and mortality statistics. 
A subcommittee was therefore appointed, which prepared a draft of a Proposed Statistical 
Classification of Diseases, Injuries and Causes of Deat h. A final draft was adopted by the committee 
after it had been modified on the basis of trials undertaken by various agencies in Canada, the United 
Kingdom and the United States of America. 
6.6 Sixth Revision of the International Lists 
The International Health Conference held in  New York City in June and July 1946 ( 19) entrusted the 
Interim Commission of the World Health Organization with the responsibility of: 
reviewing the existing machinery a nd of undertaking such preparatory work as may be necessary in 
connection with: 
(i) the next decennial revision of “The Internationa l Lists of Causes of Death” (including the lists 
adopted under the International Agreement of 1934, relating to Statistics of Causes of Death); and 
(ii) the establishment of International Lists of Causes of Morbidity 
To meet this responsibility, the Interim Commi ssion appointed the Expert Committee for the 
Preparation of the Sixth Decennial Revision of the International Lists of Diseases and Causes of 
Death. 
This Committee, taking full account of prevaili ng opinion concerning morbidity and mortality 
classification, reviewed and revised the above-m entioned proposed classification which had been 
prepared by the United States Committee on Joint Causes of Death. 
The resulting classification was circulated to national governments preparing morbidity and mortality 
statistics for comments and suggestions under the title, International Classification of Diseases, 
Injuries, and Causes of Death.  The Expert Committee considered th e replies and prepared a revised 
version incorporating such changes as appeared  to improve the utility and acceptability of the 
classification. The Committee also compiled a list of diagnostic terms to appear under each title of the 
classification. Furthermore, a subcommittee was a ppointed to prepare a comprehensive alphabetical 
index of diagnostic statements classified to the appropriate category of the classification. 
The Committee also considered the structure and uses of special lists of causes for tabulation and 
publication of morbidity and mortality statistics and studied other problems related to the international 
comparability of mortality statistics, such as form of medical certificate and rules for classification. 
The International Conference for the Sixth Revisi on of the International Lists of Diseases and Causes 
of Death was convened in Paris from 26 to 30 Ap ril 1948 by the Government of France under the 
terms of the agreement signed at the close of the Fifth Revision Conference in 1938. Its secretariat was 
entrusted jointly to the competent French authoriti es and to the World Health Organization, which had 
carried out the preparatory work under the terms of the arrangement concluded by the governments 
represented at the International Health Conference in 1946 (19). 

--- PAGE 115 ---
HISTORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ICD 
109 
 
The Conference adopted the classification prepared by the Expert Committee as the Sixth Revision of 
the International Lists (20). It also considered other proposals of the Expert Committee concerning the 
compilation, tabulation and publication of morbidity and mortality statistics. The Conference approved 
the International Form of Medical Certificate of Cause of Death, accepted the underlying cause of 
death as the main cause to be tabulated, and endor sed the rules for selecting the underlying cause of 
death as well as the special lists for tabulation of morbidity and mortality data. It further recommended 
that the World Health Assembly should adopt regulations under Article 21 (b) of the WHO 
Constitution to guide Member States in compiling morbidity and mortality statistics in accordance 
with the International Statistical Classification. 
In 1948, the First World Health Assembly endorsed the report of the Sixth Revision Conference and 
adopted World Health Organization Regulations No. 1, prepared on the basis of the recommendations 
of the Conference. The International Classification, including the Tabular List of Inclusions defining 
the content of the categories, was incorporated, toge ther with the form of the medical certificate of 
cause of death, the rules for classification and the special lists for tabulation, into the Manual of the 
International Statistical Classification of Diseases, Injuries, and Causes of Death  (21). The Manual 
consisted of two volumes, Volume 2 being an alpha betical index of diagnostic terms coded to the 
appropriate categories.The Sixth Decennial Revision Conference marked the beginning of a new era in 
international vital and health statistics. Apart from approving a comprehensive list for both mortality 
and morbidity and agreeing on international rules for selecting the underlying cause of death, it 
recommended the adoption of a comprehensive programme  of international cooperation in the field of 
vital and health statistics. An important item in this programme was the recommendation that 
governments establish national committees on vital and h ealth statistics to coordinate the statistical 
activities in the country, and to serve as a link betw een the national statistical institutions and the 
World Health Organization. It was further envisag ed that such national committees would, either 
singly or in cooperation with other national committ ees, study statistical problems of public health 
importance and make the results of their investigations available to WHO. 
6.7 The Seventh and Eighth Revisions 
The International Conference for the Seventh Revi sion of the International Classification of Diseases 
was held in Paris under the auspices of WHO in February 1955 ( 22). In accordance with a 
recommendation of the WHO Expert Committee on Health Statistics, this revision was limited to 
essential changes and amendments of errors and inconsistencies (23). 
The Eighth Revision Conference convened by WHO met in Geneva, from 6 to 12 July 1965 ( 24). This 
revision was more radical than the Seventh but left  unchanged the basic structure of the Classification 
and the general philosophy of classifying diseases, wh enever possible, according to their etiology 
rather than a particular manifestation. 
During the years that the Seventh and Eighth Revisions  of the ICD were in force, the use of the ICD 
for indexing hospital medical records increased rapidly and some countries prepared national 
adaptations which provided the additional detail needed for this application of the ICD. 
6.8 The Ninth Revision 
The International Conference for the Ninth Revisi on of the International Classification of Diseases, 
convened by WHO, met in Geneva from 30 September to 6 October 1975 ( 25). In the discussions 
leading up to the conference, it had originally been  intended that there should be little change other 
than updating of the classification. This was mainly because of the expense of adapting 
data-processing systems each time the classification was revised. There had been an enormous growth 
of interest in the ICD and ways had to be f ound of responding to this, partly by modifying the 
classification itself and partly by introducing speci al coding provisions. A number of representations 
were made by specialist bodies which had become inte rested in using the ICD for their own statistics. 
Some subject areas in the classification were rega rded as inappropriately arranged and there was 
considerable pressure for more detail and for adapta tion of the classification to make it more relevant 
for the evaluation of medical care, by classifying cond itions to the chapters concerned with the part of 
the body affected rather than to those dealing with the underlying generalized disease. At the other end 

--- PAGE 116 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
110 
of the scale, there were representations from count ries and areas where a detailed and sophisticated 
classification was irrelevant, but which nevertheless needed a classification based on the ICD in order 
to assess their progress in health care and in the control of disease. 
The final proposals presented to and accepted by the Conference retained the basic structure of the 
ICD, although with much additional detail at the le vel of the four-digit subcategories, and some 
optional five-digit subdivisions. For the benefit of users not requiring such detail, care was taken to 
ensure that the categories at the three-digit level were appropriate. 
For the benefit of users wishing to produce statisti cs and indexes oriented towards medical care, the 
Ninth Revision included an optional alternative me thod of classifying diagnostic statements, including 
information about both an underlying general disease and a manifestation in a particular organ or site. 
This system became known as the dagger and asterisk sy stem and is retained in the Tenth Revision. A 
number of other technical innovations were include d in the Ninth Revision, aimed at increasing its 
flexibility for use in a variety of situations. 
The Twenty-ninth World Health Assembly, no ting the recommendations of the International 
Conference for the Ninth Revision of the International Classification of Diseases, approved the 
publication, for trial purposes, of supplementary cl assifications of Impairments and Handicaps and of 
Procedures in Medicine as supplements to, but not as integral parts of, the International Classification 
of Diseases. The Conference also made recommendations on a number of related technical subjects: 
coding rules for mortality were amended slightly and rules for the selection of a single cause for 
tabulation of morbidity were introduced for the first time; definitions and recommendations for 
statistics in the field of perinatal mortality were  amended and extended and a certificate of causes of 
perinatal death was recommended; countries were encouraged to do further work on 
multiple-condition coding and analysis, but no formal  methods were recommended; and a new basic 
tabulation list was produced. 
6.9 Preparations for the Tenth Revision 
Even before the Conference for the Ninth Revision,  WHO had been preparing for the Tenth Revision. 
It had been realized that the great expansion in  the use of the ICD necessitated a thorough rethinking 
of its structure and an effort to devise a stable and flexible classification, which should not require 
fundamental revision for many years to come. The WHO Collaborating Centres for Classification of 
Diseases (see Volume 1) were consequently called upon to experiment with models of alternative 
structures for ICD-10. 
It had also become clear that the established ten-y ear interval between revisions was too short. Work 
on the revision process had to start before the curre nt version of the ICD had been in use long enough 
to be thoroughly evaluated, mainly because the necessity to consult so many countries and 
organizations made the process a very lengthy one. The Director-General of WHO therefore wrote to 
the Member States and obtained their agreement to postpone until 1989 the Tenth Revision 
Conference, which was originally scheduled fo r 1985 and to delay the introduction of the Tenth 
Revision which would have been due in 1989. In  addition to permitting experimentation with 
alternative models for the structure of the ICD, this allowed time for the evaluation of ICD-9, for 
example through meetings organized by some of the WHO Regional Offices and through a survey 
organized at headquarters. 
An extensive programme of work followed which culm inated in the Tenth Revision of the ICD and is 
described in the Report of the International Conf erence for the Tenth Revision of the International 
Classification of Diseases, reproduced in Volume 1. 

--- PAGE 117 ---
 
111 
7. Appendices 
7.1 List of conditions unlikely to cause death 
Code Category or subcategory 
  
A31.1 Cutaneous mycobacterial infection 
A42.8 Other forms of cutaneous actinomycosis 
A60.0 Herpesviral infection of genitalia and 
urogenital tract 
A71.0–A71.9 Trachoma 
A74.0 Chlamydial conjunctivitis 
B00.2 Herpesviral gingivostomatitis 
B00.5 Herpesviral ocular disease 
B00.8 Herpesviral whitlow 
B07 Viral warts 
B08.1 Molluscum contagiosum 
B08.8 Foot and mouth disease 
B30.0–B30.9 Viral conjunctivitis 
B35.0–B35.9 Dermatophytosis 
B36.0–B36.9 Other superficial mycoses 
B85.0–B85.4 Pediculo sis and phthiriasis 
F45.3–F45.9 Somatoform disorders 
F50.1, F50.3–F50.9 Eating disorders 
F51.0–F51.9 Nonorganic sleep disorders 
F52.0–F52.9 Sexual dysfuncti on, not caused by organic 
disorder or disease 
F60.0–F60.9 Specific personality disorders 
F61 Mixed and other personality disorders 
F62.0–F62.9 Enduring personality changes, not attributable 
to brain damage and disease 
F63.0–F63.9 Habit and impulse disorders 
F64.0–F64.9 Gender identity disorders 
F65.0–F65.9 Disorders of sexual preference 
F66.0–F66.9 Psychological and behavioural disorders 
associated with sexual development and 
orientation 
F68.0–F68.9 Other disorders of adult personality and 
behaviour 
F69 Unspecified disorder of adult personality and 
behaviour 

--- PAGE 118 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
112 
Code Category or subcategory 
  
F95.0–F95.9 Tic disorders 
F98.0–F98.9 Other behavioural  and emotional disorders 
with an onset usually occurring in childhood 
and adolescence 
G43.0–G43.2, G43.8–
G43.9 
Migraine, except complicated migraine 
(G43.3) 
G44.0–G44.2 Other headache syndromes 
G45.0–G45.9 Transient cerebral ischaemic attacks and 
related syndromes 
G50.0–G50.9 Disorders of trigeminal nerve 
G51.0–G51.9 Facial nerve disorders 
G54.0–G54.9 Nerve root and plexus disorders 
G56.0–G56.9 Mononeuropathies of upper limb 
G57.0–G57.9 Mononeuropathies of lower limb 
G58.7 Mononeuritis multiplex 
H00.0–H00.1 Hordeolum and chalazion 
H01.0–H01.9 Other inflammation of eyelid 
H02.0–H02.9 Other disorders of eyelid 
H04.0–H04.9 Disorders of lacrimal system 
H10.0–H10.9 Conjunctivitis 
H11.0–H11.9 Other disorders of conjunctiva 
H15.0–H15.9 Disorders of sclera 
H16.0–H16.9 Keratitis 
H17.0–H17.9 Corneal scars and opacities 
H18.0–H18.9 Other disorders of cornea 
H20.0–H20.9 Iridocyclitis 
H21.0–H21.9 Other disorders of iris and ciliary body 
H25.0–H25.9 Senile cataract 
H26.0–H26.9 Other cataract 
H27.0–H27.9 Other disorders of lens 
H30.0–H30.9 Chorioretinal inflammation 
H31.0–H31.9 Other disorders of choroid  
H33.0–H33.5 Retinal detachments and breaks 
H34.0–H34.9 Retinal vascular occlusions 
H35.0–H35.9 Other retinal disorders 
H40.0–H40.9 Glaucoma 
H43.0–H43.9 Disorders of vitreous body 
H46 Optic neuritis 
H47.0–H47.7 Other disorders of optic (2
nd) nerve and visual 
pathways 
H49.0–H49.9 Paralytic strabismus 
H50.0–H50.9 Other strabismus 

--- PAGE 119 ---
Appendices 
113 
Code Category or subcategory 
  
H51.0–H51.9 Other disorders of binocular movement 
H52.0–H52.7 Disorders of refraction and accommodation 
H53.0–H53.9 Visual disturbances 
H54.0–H54.9 Blindness and low vision 
H55 Nystagmus and other irregular eye 
movements 
H57.0–H57.9 Other disorders of eye and adnexa 
H59.0–H59.9 Postprocedural di sorders of eye and adnexa, 
not elsewhere classified 
H60.0–H60.9 Otitis externa 
H61.0–H61.9 Other disorders of external ear 
H80.0–H80.9 Otosclerosis 
H83.3–H83.9 Other diseases of inner ear 
H90.0–H90.8 Conductive and sensorineural hearing loss 
H91.0–H91.9 Other hearing loss 
H92.0–H92.2 Otalgia and effusion of ear 
H93.0–H93.9 Other disorders of ear, not elsewhere 
classified 
J00 Acute nasopharyngitis [common cold] 
J06.0–J06.9 Acute upper respirator y infections of multiple 
and unspecified sites 
J30.0–J30.4 Vasomotor and allergic rhinitis 
J33.0–J33.9 Nasal polyp 
J34.2 Deviated nasal septum 
J35.0–J35.9 Chronic disease of tonsils and adenoids 
K00.0–K00.9 Disorders of t ooth development and eruption 
K01.0–K01.1 Embedded and impacted teeth 
K02.0–K02.9 Dental caries 
K03.0–K03.9 Other diseases of hard tissues of teeth 
K04.0–K04.9 Diseases of pulp and periapical tissues 
K05.0–K05.6 Gingivitis and periodontal diseases 
K06.0–K06.9 Other disorder s of gingiva and edentulous 
alveolar ridge 
K07.0–K07.9 Dentofacial anomalies (including  
malocclusion) 
K08.0–K08.9 Other disorder s of teeth and supporting 
structures 
K09.0–K09.9 Cyst of oral regi on, not elsewhere classified 
K10.0–K10.9 Other diseases of jaws 
K11.0–K11.9 Diseases of salivary glands 
K14.0–K14.9 Diseases of tongue 
L01.0–L01.1 Impetigo (for infant s over 1 year of age) 

--- PAGE 120 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
114 
Code Category or subcategory 
  
L03.0 Cellulitis of finger and toe 
L04.0–L04.9 Acute lymphadenitis 
L05.0–L05.9 Pilonidal cyst 
L08.0–L08.8 Other local infections of skin and 
subcutaneous tissue 
L20.0–L20.9 Atopic dermatitis 
L21.0–L21.9 Seborrhoeic dermatitis 
L22 Diaper [napkin] dermatitis 
L23.0–L23.9 Allergic contact dermatitis 
L24.0–L24.9 Irritant contact dermatitis 
L25.0–L25.9 Unspecified contact dermatitis 
L28.0–L28.2 Lichen simplex chronicus and prurigo 
L29.0–L29.9 Pruritus 
L30.0–L30.9 Other dermatitis 
L41.0–L41.9 Parapsoriasis 
L42 Pityriasis rosea 
L43.0–L43.9 Lichen planus 
L44.0–L44.9 Other papulosquamous disorders 
L55.0–L55.1, L55.8–L55.9 Sunburn, exc ept sunburn of third degree 
(L55.2) 
L56.0–L56.9 Other acute skin changes due to ultraviolet 
radiation 
L57.0–L57.9 Skin changes due to chronic exposure to 
nonionizing radiation 
L58.0–L58.9 Radiodermatitis 
L59.0–L59.9 Other disorders of skin and subcutaneous 
tissue related to radiation 
L60.0–L60.9 Nail disorders 
L63.0–L63.9 Alopecia areata 
L64.0–L64.9 Androgenic alopecia 
L65.0–L65.9 Other nonscarring hair loss 
L66.0–L66.9 Cicatricial alopecia [scarring hair loss] 
L67.0–L67.9 Hair colour and hair shaft abnormalities 
L68.0–L68.9 Hypertrichosis 
L70.0–L70.9 Acne 
L72.0–L72.9 Follicular cysts of skin and subcutaneous 
tissue 
L73.0–L73.9 Other follicular disorders 
L74.0–L74.9 Eccrine sweat disorders 
L75.0–L75.9 Aprocrine sweat disorders 
L80 Vitiligo 
L81.0–L81.9 Other disorders of pigmentation 

--- PAGE 121 ---
Appendices 
115 
Code Category or subcategory 
  
L83 Acanthosis nigricans 
L84 Corns and callosities 
L85.0–L85.9 Other epidermal thickening 
L87.0–L87.9 Transepidermal elimination disorders 
L90.0–L90.9 Atrophic disorders of skin 
L91.0–L91.9 Hypertrophic disorders of skin 
L92.0–L92.9 Granulomatous disorders of skin and 
subcutaneous tissue 
L94.0–L94.9 Other localized connective tissue disorders 
L98.0–L98.3, L98.5-L95.9 Other diso rders of skin and subcutaneous 
tissue, not elsewhere classified 
M20.0–M20.6 Acquired deformities of fingers and toes 
M21.0–M21.9 Other acquired deformities of limbs 
M22.0–M22.9 Disorders of patella 
M23.0–M23.9 Internal derangement of knee 
M24.0–M24.9 Other specific joint derangements 
M25.0–M25.9 Other joint disorders, not elsewhere classified 
M35.3 Polymyalgia rheumatica 
M40.0–M40.5 Kyphosis and lordosis 
M43.6  Torticollis, unspecified 
M43.8–M43.9 Other and unspecified deforming 
dorsopathies 
M48.0 Spinal stenosis (except for the cervical region)
M53.0–M53.9 Other dorsopathies, not elsewhere classified 
M54.0–M54.9 Dorsalgia 
M60.0–M60.9 Myositis 
M65.0–M65.9 Synovitis  and tenosynovitis 
M66.0–M66.5 Spontaneous rupt ure of synovium and tendon 
M67.0–M67.9 Other disor ders of synovium and tendon 
M70.0–M70.9 Soft tissue disorders related to use, overuse 
and pressure 
M71.0–M71.9 Other bursopathies 
M72.5 Fasciitis, not elsewhere classified 
M75.0–M75.9 Shoulder lesions 
M76.0–M76.9 Enthesopathies of lower limb, excluding foot 
M77.0–M77.9 Other enthesopathies 
M79.0–M79.9 Other soft tissue disorders, not elsewhere 
classified 
M95.0–M95.9 Other acquired deformities of musculoskeletal 
system and connective tissue 
M99.0–M99.9 Biomechanical lesions, not elsewhere 
classified 

--- PAGE 122 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
116 
Code Category or subcategory 
  
N39.3 Stress incontinence 
N46 Male infertility 
N47 Redundant prepuce, phimosis, and 
paraphimosis 
N60.0–N60.9 Benign mammary dysplasia 
N84.0–N84.9 Polyp of female genital tract 
N85.0–N85.9 Other noninflammato ry disorders of uterus, 
except cervix 
N86 Erosion and ectropion of cervix uteri 
N87.0–N87.9 Dysplasia of cervix uteri 
N88.0–N88.9 Other noninflammato ry disorders of cervix 
uteri 
N89.0–N89.9 Other noninflammato ry disorders of  vagina 
N90.0–N90.9 Other noninflammato ry disorders of vulva and 
perineum 
N91.0–N91.5 Absent, scanty, and rare menstruation 
N92.0–N92.9 Excessive, frequent, and irregular 
menstruation 
N93.0–N93.9 Other abnormal uterine and vaginal bleeding 
N94.0–N94.9 Pain and other conditions associated with 
female genital organs and menstrual cycle 
N96 Habitual aborter 
N97.0–N97.9 Female infertility 
Q10.0–Q10.7 Congenital malformations of eyelid, lacrimal 
apparatus and orbit 
Q11.0–Q11.3 Anophthalmos, microphthalmos and 
macrophthalmos 
Q12.0–Q12.9 Congenital lens malformations 
Q13.0–Q13.9 Congenital malformations of anterior segment 
of eye 
Q14.0–Q14.9 Congenital malformations of posterior 
segment of eye 
Q15.0–Q15.9 Other congenital malformations of eye 
Q16.0–Q16.9 Congenital malformations of ear causing 
impairment of hearing 
Q17.0–Q17.9 Other congenital malformations of ear 
Q18.0–Q18.9 Other congenital malformations of face and 
neck 
Q38.1 Tongue tie 
Q65.0–Q65.9 Congenital deformities of hip 
Q66.0–Q66.9 Congenital deformities of feet 
Q67.0–Q67.8 Congenital musculoskeletal deformities of 
head, face, spine and chest 
Q68.0–Q68.8 Other congenital musculoskeletal deformities 
Q69.0–Q69.9 Polydactyly 
Q70.0–Q70.9 Syndactyly 
Q71.0–Q71.9 Reduction defects of upper limb 
Q72.0–Q72.9 Reduction defects of lower limb 
Q73.0–Q73.8 Reduction defects of unspecified limb 
Q74.0–Q74.9 Other congenital malformations of limb(s) 
Q80.0–Q80.3, Q80.8–
Q80.9 
Congenital ichthyosis, except Harlequin fetus 
(Q80.4) 
Q81.0  Epidermolysis bullosa simplex 
Q81.2–Q81.9 Other forms of epi dermolysis bullosa, except 
epidermolysis bullosa letalis (Q81.1) 
Q82.0–Q82.9 Other congenital malformations of skin 
Q83.0–Q83.9 Congenital malformations of breast 
Q84.0–Q84.9 Other congenital malformations of integument 

--- PAGE 123 ---
Appendices 
117 
Code Category or subcategory 
  
S00.0–S00.9 Superficial injury of head 
S05.0, S05.1, S05.8 Superficial in juries (any type) of eye and orbit 
(any part) 
S10.0–S10.9 Superficial injury of neck 
S20.0–S20.8 Superficial injury of thorax 
S30.0–S30.9 Superficial inju ry of abdomen, lower back and 
pelvis 
S40.0–S40.9 Superficial injury of shoulder and upper arm 
S50.0–S50.9 Superficial injury of forearm 
S60.0–S60.9 Superficial injury of wrist and hand 
S70.0–S70.9 Superficial injury of hip and thigh 
S80.0–S80.9 Superficial injury of lower leg 
S90.0–S90.9 Superficial in jury of ankle and foot 
T09.0  Superficial  injury of trunk, level unspecified 
T11.0 Superficial injury of upper limb, level 
unspecified 
T13.0 Superficial injury of lower limb, level 
unspecified 
T14.0 Superficial injury of unspecified body region 
T20.1 Burn of first degree of head and neck 
T21.1 Burn of first degree of trunk 
T22.1 Burn of first degree of shoulder and upper 
limb, except wrist and hand 

--- PAGE 124 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
118 
Code Category or subcategory 
  
T23.1 Burn of first degree of wrist and hand 
T24.1 Burn of first degree of hip and lower limb 
except ankle and foot 
T25.1 Burn of first degree of ankle and foot 

--- PAGE 125 ---
 
119 
References 
1. International classification of diseases for oncology  (ICD-O), second ed. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 1990. 
2. Systematized nomenclature of medicine  (SNOMED). Chicago, College of American Pathologists, 
1976. 
3. Manual of tumor nomenclature and coding  (MOTNAC). New York, American Cancer Society, 
1968. 
4. Systematized nomenclature of pathology  (SNOP). Chicago, College of American Pathologists, 
1965. 
5. The ICD-10 classification of mental and behav ioural disorders: clinical descriptions and 
diagnostic guidelines. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1992. 
6. International classification of procedures in medicine  (ICPM). Vols 1 and 2. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 1978. 
7. International classification of impairments, di sabilities, and handicaps. A manual of classification 
relating to the consequences of disease. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1980. 
8. International Nomenclature of Diseases . Geneva, Council for Intern ational Organizations of 
Medical Sciences and World Health Organization; for details of individual volumes, see text. 
9. Sixteenth annual report. London, Registrar General of England and Wales, 1856, App. p. 73. 
10. Knibbs G.H. The International Classification of  Disease and Causes of Death and its revision. 
Medical journal of Australia, 1929, 1:2-12. 
11. Greenwood M. Medical statistics from Graunt to Farr . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 
1948. 
12. First annual report. London, Registrar General of England and Wales, 1839, p. 99. 
13. Bertillon J. Classification of the causes of death (abstract). In: Transactions of the 15th 
International Congress on Hygiene Demography. Washington, 1912. 
14. Bulletin of the Institute of International Statistics, 1900, 12:280. 
15. Roesle E. Essai d’une statistique comparative de la morbidité devant servir à établir les listes 
spéciales des causes de morbidité. Geneva, League of Nations  Health Organization, 1928 
(document C.H. 730) 
16. International list of causes of death. The Hague, International Statistical Institute, 1940. 
17. Medical Research Council, Committee on Hospital Morbidity Statistics. A provisional 
classification of diseases and injuries for use in compiling morbidity statistics.  London, Her 
Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1944 (Special Report Series No. 248). 
18. US Public Health Service, Division of Public Health Methods. Manual for coding causes of illness 
according to a diagnosis code for tabulating morbidity statistics.  Washington, Government 
Publishing Office, 1944 (Miscellaneous Publication No. 32). 
19. Official Records of the World Health Organization, 1948, 11, 23. 
20. Official Records of the World Health Organization, 1948, 2, 110. 
21. Manual of the international statistical classific ation of diseases, injuries, and causes of death. 
Sixth revision. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1949. 
22. Report of the International Conference for the S eventh Revision of the International Lists of 
Diseases and Causes of Death. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1955 (unpublished document 
WHO/HA/7 Rev. Conf./17 Rev. 1. 
23. Third Report of the Expert Committee on Health Statistics . Geneva, World Health Organization, 
1952 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 53). 
24. Report of the International Conference for the Eighth Revision of the International Classification 
of Diseases. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1965 (unpublished document WHO/ICD9/74.4. 
25. Manual of the international statistical classific ation of diseases, injuries, and causes of death , 
Volume 1. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1977. 

--- PAGE 126 ---


--- PAGE 127 ---
 
121 
Index 
 
Abnormal findings, 74, 88 
Abortion, complications, 43, 86 
Accidents, 45, 50 
Acute and chronic conditions, 77 
Age classification, 94, 98 
Alcohol, 38, 45 
Alphabetical Index (Volume 3), 15, 21 
arrangement, 21 
code numbers, 21 
conventions, 21 
structure, 21 
"And" in titles, 19 
Angina pectoris, 40 
Application of the International Classification of 
Diseases to Dentistry and Stomatology (ICD-
DA), 5 
Application of the International Classification of 
Diseases to Rheumatology and Orthopaedics 
(ICD-R&O), 6 
Area classifications, 94 
Asterisk categories (see also Dagger and Asterisk 
system), 16, 20 
Asthma, 42 
Atherosclerosis, 41 
Bacterial agents, 37, 82 
Bertillon, Jacques, 104 
Biological substances, poisoning by, 44, 64 
Birth weight, 95, 96 
classification, 98 
extremely low, 95 
low, 95 
very low, 95 
Birth(s) 
live, 95 
registration, 96 
Blindness, 38, 86 
Blocks of categories, 12 
Blood and blood-forming organs, diseases of, 84 
Bossier de Lacroix, François (Sauvages), 103 
Brace, 19 
Brackets, square, 18 
Bronchitis, 42 
Bronchopneumonia, 29 
 
Cancer (see also Malignant neoplasms), 52 
Carcinoid syndrome, 85 
Carcinoma, 52, 55 
Carcinomatosis, 55 
Cardiac arrest, 40 
Cardiac arrhythmias, 40 
Cause(s) of death 
assumption of intervening, 49 
certification. see Death certificate 
consistency between sex and diagnosis, 52 
definition, 23 
duration of disease and, 51 
expressions indicating doubtful diagnosis, 64 
interpretation of entries, 49 
joint, history of classification, 106, 107 
modification, 31 
modification rules, 31 
originating antecedent, 24, 25 
General Principle, 26, 27 
selection rules, 26, 27 
sequence, 25 
statistical presentation, 92 
underlying, 23 
notes for use in coding, 36 
selection procedures, 25 
summary of codes not to be used, 48 
Cerebrovascular disease, 41, 50, 86 
Chapters, 12 
Childbirth, 86 
Chorea, 38 
Chromosomal abnormalities, 51, 63 
Circulatory diseases, 86 
acute or terminal, 50 
malignant neoplasms and, 50, 62 
postprocedural, 42 
Classification of disease 
diagnosis-related, 3, 5 
history, 103 
non-diagnostic, 4, 6 
principles, 10 
Clinical findings, abnormal, 74, 88 
Coding, basic guidelines, 22 
Colon, 19 
Combination categories, 75 
Community-based information, 8 
Conduction disorders, 40 
Congenital malformations/deformations, 50, 51, 63, 
96 
Conventions, 18, 21 
Council for International Organizations of Medical 
Sciences (CIOMS), 9 
Cross-references, 21, 22 
Crown-heel length, 96 
Cullen, William, 103 
 
D’Espine, Marc, 104 
Dagger and asterisk system, 16, 20, 110 
morbidity coding, 74, 93 
Death certificate, 91 
perinatal, 65 
Death, causes of. see Cause(s) of death 
Definitions, 11, 95, 99 

--- PAGE 128 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
122 
Dehydration (volume depletion), 29, 37 
Delivery, 44, 87 
Dentistry, 5 
Dermatology, 5 
Diabetes mellitus, 50, 84 
Digestive disorders, postprocedural, 43 
Disability, 7 
Disease classification. see Classification of disease 
Drugs, poisoning by, 64 
Dual coding, 16, 93 
Duration of disease, mortality coding and, 51 
 
Ear and mastoid process, diseases of, 39, 86 
Early neonatal death, 98 
Early neonatal mortality rate, weight-specific, 97 
Early/late stages of disease, 32, 35 
Ectopic pregnancy, complications, 86 
Embolic disorders, 29 
Emphysema, 42 
Endocrine diseases, 38, 84 
Erysipelas, 37 
Exclusion terms, 16 
External causes 
morbidity, 73, 76, 88 
mortality, 25, 44, 64 
Eye and adnexa, diseases of, 38, 86 
 
Facial fractures, 44 
Farr, William, 10, 103, 106 
Females, categories limited to, 20 
Fetal death, 95 
definition, 95 
registration, 96 
reporting criteria, 96 
statistics for international comparison, 96 
Fetal death rate, 97 
weight-specific, 97 
Fetal death ratio, 97 
Fetopelvic disproportion, 44 
Fifth/subsequent character levels, 13, 91 
Four-character subcategories, 3, 11, 12 
statistical presentation, 91 
use, 15 
Functioning, 7 
General Principle, cause of death, 26, 27 
Genitourinary disorders, postprocedural, 43 
Gestational age, 95, 96 
classification, 98 
Glossary descriptions, 16 
Graunt, John, 103 
 
Health Organization of the League of Nations, 105 
Health services, contact for reasons other than 
illness, 72 
Hearing loss, 39, 86 
Heart disease, 39 
Heart failure, 40 
Hemiplegia, 38 
"Highly improbable" relationships, 49 
HIV disease. see Human immunodeficiency virus 
disease 
Huber, Michel, 105 
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease 
maternal deaths, 99 
morbidity coding, 82 
mortality coding, 29, 37, 64 
Hyperalimentation, sequela, 85 
Hypertension 
essential (primary), 39 
secondary, 40, 86 
Hypertensive conditions, 39, 50 
 
ICD-10 
basic structure and principles, 10 
diagnosis-related classifications, 3, 5 
family of disease and health-related 
classifications, 3 
history of development, 103 
method of use, 15 
non-diagnostic classifications, 4, 6 
preparations for, 110 
purpose and applicability, 3 
role of WHO, 9 
Ill-defined conditions, 31, 32, 100 
Inclusion terms, 15 
Infant mortality, 94, 98 
Infant mortality rate, 98 
weight-specific, 98 
Infectious agents, 37, 82 
Infectious and parasitic diseases 
malignant neoplasms and, 61 
morbidity coding, 82 
mortality coding, 36, 49 
sequelae, 52, 82 
Infertility, 43 
Inflammatory diseases of central nervous system, 
52, 85 
Influenza, 50 
 
Injuries 
dual coding, 18 
morbidity coding, 88 
mortality coding, 25, 44, 63 
sequelae, 89 
International Classification of Causes of Sickness 
and Death, 106 
International Classification of Diseases for 
Oncology (ICD-O), 5 
 

--- PAGE 129 ---
INDEX 
123 
International Classification of Diseases, Injuries, 
and Causes of Death, 108 
eighth revision, 109 
ninth revision, 109 
seventh revision, 109 
tenth revision. see ICD-10 
 
International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health, 7 
International Classification of Impairments, 
Disabilities and Handicaps. see International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and 
Health 
International Classification of Musculoskeletal 
Disorders (ICMSD), 6 
International Classification of Procedures in 
Medicine (ICPM), 6 
International Coding Index for Dermatology, 5 
International List of Causes of Death, 104, 107 
fifth revision, 107 
sixth revision, 108 
International Lists of Diseases, 105 
International Nomenclature of Diseases (IND), 4, 9 
International Statistical Institute, 104 
Intracranial injury, 44 
Ischaemic heart disease, 40 
 
Kidney, contracted, 43 
 
Laboratory findings, abnormal, 74, 88 
Lay reporting, 8 
Lead terms, 21, 22 
Length, crown-heel, 96 
Linkage 
by code number, 36 
summary, 46 
causes of death, 31, 33 
Linnaeus, Carolus, 103 
Live birth, 95 
Lung neoplasms, 55 
Males, categories limited to, 20 
Malignant neoplasms, 5 
circulatory disease and, 62 
implied malignancy, 53 
independent (primary) multiple sites, 54, 83 
infectious diseases and, 61 
metastatic, 55 
morbidity coding, 83 
mortality coding, 29, 49, 52 
multiple sites, 59 
primary site indicated, 53 
primary site unknown, 54 
sites with prefixes or imprecise definitions, 53 
unspecified site, 53, 83 
Malnutrition, sequelae, 85 
Maternal death, 99 
late, 99 
Maternal mortality, 43, 51, 99 
definitions, 99 
denominators, 99 
international reporting, 99 
published rates, 99 
Maternal mortality rate, 99, 100 
Medicaments, poisoning by, 44, 64 
Meningococcaemia, 37 
Mental and behavioural disorders, 85 
glossary descriptions, 16 
mortality coding, 38 
organic, 18, 38 
Mental and behavourial disorders, 6 
Mental retardation, 38 
Metabolic diseases, 38, 84 
Mitral valve disease, 39 
"Mixed Commission", 105 
Modification rules, cause of death, 31 
Molar pregnancy, complications, 43 
Morbidity, 71 
chapter-specific notes, 81 
coding "main condition" and "other conditions", 
73 
diagnostic information for single-condition 
analysis, 72 
history of disease classification, 106 
rules for reselection of main condition, 78 
special tabulation list, 11, 93 
modification for national uses, 93 
statistics, 100 
Mortality (see also Cause(s) of death) 
guidelines for certification and rules for coding, 
23 
special tabulation lists, 11, 92 
condensed lists, 92 
locally designed, 92 
prefixes used in identification, 92 
selected lists, 92 
Multiple conditions, 73, 75 
Multiple gestation, 43 
Multiple injuries, 88 
Musculoskeletal disorders, postprocedural, 43 
Myocardial infarction, acute, 40 
 
Nasopharyngitis, acute, 42 
"NEC" (not elsewhere classified), 19, 21 
Neonatal death, 94 
definitions, 95 
late, 96 
reporting criteria, 96 
statistics for international comparison, 96 
Neonatal mortality rate, 97 
weight-specific, 98 
Neonatal period, 96 
Neoplasms 
functionally active, 17 
malignant. see Malignant neoplasms 
morbidity coding, 83 
morphology, 11, 17 
Nephritic syndrome, 29, 43 
 

--- PAGE 130 ---
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
124 
Nervous system diseases, 85 
inflammatory, 52, 85 
postprocedural, 38 
Neurology, 6 
Nightingale, Florence, 106 
Nomenclature regulations, 11 
Non-conventional methods, information collection, 
8 
Non-illness situations, 74 
NOS (not otherwise specified), 19 
"Not elsewhere classified" (NEC), 19, 21 
"Not otherwise specified" (NOS), 19 
Noxious substances, poisoning by, 45 
Nutritional diseases, 84 
 
Obstetric deaths, 51 
direct, 99 
indirect, 99 
Obstetric mortality ratio, direct, 100 
Oncology, 5 
Operations (see also Postprocedural disorders) 
cause of death, 52 
consequences, 29 
 
Paediatrics, 6 
Paralytic syndromes, 38, 85 
Paraplegia, 38 
Parentheses, 18, 21 
Perinatal mortality, 65, 94 
certification, 65 
coding, 69 
coding rules, 69 
definitions, 95 
presentation of causes, 98 
reporting criteria, 96 
statement of causes of death, 66 
statistics for international comparison, 96 
tabulation by cause, 68 
Perinatal mortality rate, 97 
weight-specific, 97 
Perinatal mortality ratio, 97 
Perinatal period, 96 
Pneumoconiosis, 42 
Pneumonia, 29 
Point dash (.-), 20 
Poisoning 
dual coding, 18 
morbidity coding, 88 
mortality coding, 44, 45, 64 
sequelae, 89 
Population size, small, 101 
Postprocedural disorders, 20, 29 
circulatory system, 42 
digestive system, 43 
ear and mastoid process, 39 
endocrine and metabolic, 38 
eye and adnexa, 38 
genitourinary system, 43 
morbidity coding, 77 
musculoskeletal, 43 
nervous system, 38 
Postprocedural disorders, continued 
respiratory, 43 
Post-term, 95 
Pregnancy, 25, 86 
Pregnancy-related death, 99 
Pregnancy-related mortality ratio, 100 
Pre-term, 95 
Primary health care, 8 
Procedures in medicine, 6 
Psychoactive substance use, 38 
Puerperium, 86 
Pulmonary heart disease, 40 
Pulmonary oedema, 43 
Pyelonephritis, 29 
 
Renal failure, 43 
Reselection rules, morbidity coding, 78 
Respiratory disorders, postprocedural, 43 
Respiratory infections, acute upper, 42 
Rheumatic fever, 50, 62 
Rheumatic heart disease, 39, 50, 62 
Rheumatology, 6 
Rickets, sequelae, 52 
Roesle, E., 105 
 
Sauvages (François Bossier de Lacroix), 103 
Scoliosis, 43 
Scull fractures, 44 
Secondary diseases, 29 
"See also" references, 21, 22 
"See" references, 21, 22 
Selection rules, cause of death, 26, 27 
Senility, 31, 32 
Septicaemia, 37 
Sequelae 
categories, 20 
morbidity coding, 73, 76 
mortality coding, 36, 51 
Sequence, causes of death, 25 
Sex 
categories limited to one, 20 
consistency of diagnosis with, 52 
Signs, 88 
Specialty-based adaptations, 5 
Specificity 
cause of death, 31, 35 
morbidity coding, 72, 78, 81 
Statistical presentation, 91 
fetal, perinatal, neonatal and infant mortality, 94 
ill-defined causes of death, 100 
international comparisons, 94 
level of detail of cause, 91 
maternal mortality, 99 
morbidity, 100 
small population size, 101 
Source of data, 91 
subtotals, 100 
tabulation list for morbidity, 93 
tabulation lists for mortality, 92 
Status asthmaticus, 42 
Stomatology, 5 

--- PAGE 131 ---
INDEX 
125 
Suicide, 50 
Supplementary subdivisions, 13 
Suspected conditions, 74 
Symptoms, 72, 74, 88 
Systematized nomenclature of medicine 
(SNOMED), 5 
 
Tabular list 
conventions, 18 
use, 15, 22 
Tabulation lists, 5, 11 
morbidity, 11, 93 
mortality, 11, 92 
Term (pregnancy), 95 
Tetraplegia, 38 
 
Three-character categories, 3, 11, 12 
Alphabetical Index, 21 
blocks, 12 
statistical presentation, 91 
Tobacco use, 38 
Toxic agents, 18 
Trachoma, sequelae, 51 
Trivial conditions, 31, 33, 111 
Tuberculosis, 36, 51 
"U" codes, 13 
Uncertain diagnoses and symptoms, 72 
United States Government, Committee on Joint 
Cuases of Death, 105, 107 
Urban areas, 94 
Viral agents, 37, 83 
Viral encephalitis, sequelae, 51 
Vision, low, 38, 86 
Volume depletion (dehydration), 29, 37 
 
 
